Mark Twain's 



■ 




Mark Twain 



HIFT OF 



WILLIAM FA RNS WORTH 



[HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY3S3I 



Digitized by Google 



;d by Google 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S 
LETTERS 

ARRANGED WITH COMMENT 

BY 

ALBERT BIGELOW PAINE 

TWO VOLUMES 

* '« A 

VOL. II 
ILLUSTRATED 




HARPER W BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 



Digitized by Google 





Mau Twain's Lirms 

Copyright, iqi 7. by Mark Twain Company 
Printed in the United State* of America 

1917 



Digitized by Google 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

XXIX. Letters, 1884, to Howells and Others — Cable's 
Great April Pool— "Hick Finn" in Press 
— Mark Twain for Cleveland — Clemens 
and Cable 439 

XXV. The Great Year op 1885 — Clemens and Cable 

— Publication of "Huck Finn" — The 
Grant Memoirs — Mark Twain at Fifty . 448 

XXVI. Letters, i 886-87— Jane Clemens's Romance — 

Unmailed Letters, etc 467 

XXVII. Miscellaneous Letters of 1887 — Literary Ar- 

ticles— Peace fix Days at THE Farm — 

Favorite Reading — Apology to Mrs. 
Cleveland, etc 483 

XXVIII. Letters. 1888— A Yale Degree— Work on 

"The Yankee" — On Interviewing, etc. . 495 

XXIX. Letters, 1889 — The Machine — Death of Mr- 

Crane — Conclusion of "The Yankee" . . 506 

XXX. Letters, 1890 — Chiefly to Jos. T. Goodman — 

The Great Machine Enterprise .... 529 

XXXI. Letters, 1891, to Howells, Mrs. Clemens and 

Others— Return to Literature— "Ameri - 
can Claimant"— Leaving Hartford— Eu- 
rope — Down the Rhone 540 

XXXII. Letters, 1892, Chiefly to Mr. Hall and Mrs. 

Crane— In Berlin, _ Mentone, Bad-Xau- 
heim, Florence 562 

XXXIII. Letters, 1893. to Mr. Hall. Mrs, Clemens, 

amp Others — Florence — Business Trou- 
bles — "Pudd'nhead Wilson" — "Joan of 
Arc"— At the Players, New York ... 575 
)L Letters, 1894 — A Winter in New York — 

Business Failure— End of the 'Machine . 601 



Google 



CONTENTS 

CHAP. FACE 

XXXV. Letters, 1895-96, to H. H. Rogers and Others 

— Finishing "Joan of Arc" — The Trip 

Around the World — Death qf Srsv 

Clemens 621 

XXXVI. Letters, 1897 — London, Switzerland, Vienna 640 



XXXVII. Letters, 1898, to Howells and Twichell — 

Life in Vienna— Payment of the Debts — 
Assassination of the Empress .... 655 

XXXVIII. Letters, 1899, to Howells and Others — 

Vienna — London — A Summer in Sweden . 672 

XXXIX. Letters of 1900, Mainly to Twichell — The 
Boer W a r— Bo xe r Troubles— T he Re- 



turn to America 689 

XL. Letters of 1901, Chiefly to Twichell — Mark 

Twain as a Reformer — Summer at Sara- 

nac— Assassination op President McKin- 
ley 703 

XLI. Letters of 1902 — Riverdalb — York Harbor — 

Illness of Mrs. Clemens 717 

XLII. Letters of 1903 — To Various Persons — Hard 

Days a t Riverdale — Last Summer a t El- 
mira — The Return to Italy 730 

XLIIL Letters of 190 a — To Various Persons — Life 

in Villa Quarto — Death of Mrs. Clemens 
— The Return to America 748 



XLIV. Letters of 1905 — To Twichell, Mr. Duneka 

and Others — Po litics a nd Humanity — A 
Summer at Dublin — Mark Twain at 70 • 766 

XLV. Letters, 1906, to Various Persons — The Fare- 
well Lecture— A Seco nd Summer in Dub- 
lin — Billiards and Copyright .... 787 

XL VI. Letters. 1907-08 — A Degree from Oxford — 



Tin-: New Home at Redding 804 

XLVIL Letters, 1900, to Howells and Others— Life 

at Stormfield — Copyright Extension — 

Death of Jean Clemens 825 

XLVIIL Letters of iqio — Last Trip to Bermuda — Let- 
ters to Paine — The Last Letter . . . 837 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

• Mrs. Clemens About 1885 Fnmiispicc* 

Gerhardt's Bust of Mark Twain Facing p. 444 

Mark Twain and Cable on Their Reading Tour 41 450 
Villa Vivtani, Florence \ 

.Garden of Villa Viviani, Florence V 14 570 

Where Mark Twain Wrote His Joan of Arc Book ) 

Mark Twain in 1896, After His Return from His 

Tour Around the World 11 636 

Tedworth Square, London 

House occupied by the Clemens family, winter of 1806-7 

Mark Twain's Study at Weggis, Switzerland, 

1897 ' m 

Pension at Weggis, Switzerland 

Occupied by the Clemen* family, summer of 1897 

Letter to T. S. Frisbie j>«i« 648 

- Mark Twain on His Trip Around the World . Pacing p. 650 

A trick photograph made from two negatives (sec pages 647-8) 

Richard Watson Gilder About 1903 " 754 

Mark Twain's Writing at Seventy Pag* 788 

Mark Twain's Copy for Lecture Announcement . M 793 

Mark Twain's Writing in 1908 " 826 

• STORMFIBLD Pacing p. 832 

•The "Gorgeous" Letter from W. D. Howells; 

Line of Comment at Top by Mark Twain . . Pag* 839 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



XXIV 

LETTERS, 1884, TO HOWELLS AND OTHERS. CABLE'S GREAT 
APRIL FOOL. "HUCK FINN" IN PRESS. MARK TWAIN 
FOR CLEVELAND. CLEMENS AND CABLE 

MARK TWAIN had a lingering attack of the dramatic fever 
that winter. He made a play of the Prince and Pauper, 
which Howells pronounced "too thin and slight and not half 
long enough." He made another of Tom Sawyer, and probably 
destroyed it, for no trace of the MS. exists to-day. Howells 
could not join in these ventures, for he was otherwise occupied 
and had sickness in his household. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Jan. 7, '84. 

My dear Howells,— "0 my goodn's" as Jean says. 
You have now encountered at last the heaviest calamity 
that can befall an author. The scarlet fever, once domes- 
ticated, is a permanent member of the family. Money 
may desert you, friends forsake you, enemies grow indif- 
ferent to you, but the scarlet fever will be true to you, 
through thick and thin, till you be all saved or damned, 
down to the last one. I say these things to cheer you. 

The bare suggestion of scarlet fever in the family makes 
rae shudder; I believe I would almost rather have Osgood 
publish a book for me. 

You folks have our most sincere sympathy. Oh, the 
intrusion of this hideous disease is an unspeakable disaster. 

439 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



My billiard table is stacked up with books relating to 
the Sandwich Islands: the walls are upholstered with 
scraps of paper penciled with notes drawn from them. 
I have saturated myself with knowledge of that unimagin- 
ably beautiful land and that most strange and fascinating 
people. And I have begun a story. Its hidden motive 
will illustrate a but-little considered fact in human nature; 
that the religious folly you are born in you will die in, no 
matter what apparently reasonabler religious folly may 
seem to have taken its place meanwhile, and abolished 
and obliterated it. I start Bill Ragsdale at 12 years of 
age, and the heroine at 4, in the midst of the ancient 
idolatrous system, with its picturesque and amazing 
customs and superstitions, 3 months before the arrival of 
the missionaries and the erection of a shallow Christian- 
ity upon the ruins of the old paganism. Then these two 
will become educated Christians, and highly civilized. 

And then I will jump 1 5 years, and do Ragsdale's leper 
business. When we come to dramatize, we can draw a 
deal of matter from the story, all ready to our hand. 

Yrs Ever 

Mark. 

He never finished the Sandwich Islands story which he and 
Howclls were to dramatize later. His head filled up with other 
projects, such as publishing plans, reading-tours, and the like. 
The type-setting machine does not appear in the letters of this 
period, but it was an important factor, nevertheless. It was 
costing several thousand dollars a month for construction and 
becoming a heavy drain on Mark Twain's finances. It was 
necessary to recuperate, and the anxiety for a profitable play, 
or some other adventure that would bring a quick and generous 
return, grew out of this need. 

Clemens had established Charles L. Webster, his nephew by 
marriage, in a New York office, as selling agent for the Mississippi 
book and for his plays. He was also planning to let Webster 
publish the new book, I luck Finn. 

George W. Cable had proven his ability as a reader, and 
Clemens saw possibilities in a reading combination, which was 
first planned to include Aldrich, and Ho wells, and a private car. 

440 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



But Aldrich and Howells did not warm to the idea, and the car 
was eliminated from the plan. Cable came to visit Clemens 
in Hartford, and was taken with the mumps, so that the reading- 
trip was postponed. 

The fortunes of the Sellers play were most uncertain and 
becoming daily more doubtful. In February, Howells wrote: 
M If you have got any comfort in regard to our play I wish you 
would heave it into my bosom." 

Cable recovered in time, and out of gratitude planned a 
great April-fool surprise for his host. He was a systematic man, 
and did it in his usual thorough way. He sent a " private and con- 
fidential" suggestion to a hundred and fifty of Mark Twain's 
friends and admirers, nearly all distinguished literary men. The 
surest ion wai that each one of them should send a request for 
Mark Twain's autograph, timing it so that it would arrive on 
the i st of April. All seemed to have responded. Mark Twain's 
writing-table on April Fool morning was heaped with letters, 
asking in every ridiculous fashion for his "valuable autograph." 
The one from Aldrich was a fair sample. He wrote: "I am 
making a collection of autographs of our distinguished writers, 
and having read one of your works, Gabriel Canroy, I would 
like to add your name to the list." 

Of course, the joke in this was that Gabriel Conroy was by 
Bret Harte, who by this time was thoroughly detested by Mark 
Twain. The first one or two of the letters puzzled the victim; 
then he comprehended the size and character of the joke and 
entered into it thoroughly. One of the letters was from Blood - 
good YL Cutter, the "Poet Lariat" of Innocents Abroad. Cutter, 
of course, wrote in "poetry," that is to say, doggerel. Mark 
Twain's April Fool was a most pleasant one. 

Rhymed letter by Blood good H. Cutter to Mark Twain: 

Little Neck, Long Island. 

Long Island Farmer, to His Friend and Pilgrim 
Brother, Samuel L. Clemens, Esq. 

Friends, suggest in each one's behalf 
To write, and ask your autograph. 
To refuse that, I will not do, 
After the long voyage had with you, 

441 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



That was a memorable time 
You wrote in prose, I wrote in Rhyme 
To describe the wonders of each place, 
And the queer customs of each race. 

That is in my memory yet 

For while I live 111 not forget. 

I often think of that affair 

And the many that were with us there. 

As your friends think it for the best 
I ask your Autograph with the rest, 
Hoping you will it to me send 
'Twill please and cheer your dear old friend: 
Yours truly, 

Bloodgood H. Cutter. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, A pi 8, '84* 
My dear Howells,-— It took my breath away, and I 
haven't recovered it yet, entirely — I mean the generosity 
of your proposal to read the proofs of Huck Finn. 

Now if you mean it, old man — if you are in earnest- 
proceed, in God's name, and be by me forever blest. I 
cannot conceive of a rational man deliberately piling such 
an atrocious job upon himself; but if there is such a man 
and you be that man, why then pile it on. It will cost me 
a pang every time I think of it, but this anguish will be 
eingebusst to me in the joy and comfort I shall get out 
of the not having to read the verfluchtete proofs myself. 
But if you have repented of your augenblichlicher Tob- 
sucht and got back to calm cold reason again, I won't hold 
you to it unless I find I have got you down in writing 
somewhere. Herr, I would not read the proof of one of 
my books for any fair and reasonable sum whatever, if 
I could get out of it. 

442 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The proof-reading on the P & P cost me the last rags 
of my religion. M. 

Howells had written that he would be glad to help out in the 
reading of the proofs of Huck Finn, which book Webster by 
this time had in hand. Replying to Clemens's eager and grateful 
.^•icptancc now, he wrote: "It is all perfe c t ly true about the 
generosity, unless I am going to read your proofs from one of 
the shabby motives which I always find at the bottom of my 
soul if I examine it." A characteristic utterance, though we may 
be permitted to believe that his shabby motives were fewer and 
less shabby than those of mankind in general. 

The proofs which Howells was reading pleased him mightily. 
Once, during the summer, he wrote: "If I had written half as 
good a book as Huck Finn I shouldn't ask anything better than 
to read the proofs; even as it is, I don't, so send them on; they 
vrifl always find me somewhere." 

This was the summer of the Blaine-Cleveland campaign. 
Mark Twain, in company with many other leading men, had 
mugwumped, and was supporting Cleveland. From the next 
letter we gather something of the aspects of that memorable 
campaign, which was one of scandal and vituperation. We 
learn, too, that the young sculptor, Karl Gerhardt, having com- 
pleted a three years' study in Paris, had returned to America a 
qualified artist. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Elmira, Aug. 21 , '84. 
My dear Howells,— This presidential campaign is too 
delicious for anything. Isn't human nature the most con- 
suxnmate sham and lie that was ever invented? Isn't man 
a creature to be ashamed of in pretty much all his aspects? 
Man, "know thyself" — and then thou wilt despise thy- 
self, to a dead moral certainty. Take three quite good 
specimens — Hawley , Warner, and Charley Clark. Even / do 
not loathe Blaine more than they do; Yet Hawley is howl- 
ing for Blaine, Warner and Clark are eating their daily crow 
in the paper for him, and all three will vote for him. 0 Stul- 
tification, where is thy sting, 0 slave where is thy hickory! 

443 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I suppose you heard how a marble monument for which 
St. Gaudens was pecuniarily responsible, burned down in 
Hartford the other day, uninsured — for who in the world 
would ever think of insuring a marble shaft in a cemetery 
against a fire? — and left St. Gauden out of pocket $15,000. 

It was a bad day for artists. Gerhardt finished my 
bust that day, and the work was pronounced admirable 
by all the kin and friends; but in putting it in plaster 
(or rather taking it out) next day it got ruined. It was 
four or five weeks hard work gone to the dogs. The news 
flew, and everybody on the farm flocked to the arbor and 
grouped themselves about the wreck in a profound and 
moving silence — the farm-help, the colored servants, the 
German nurse, the children, everybody — a silence inter- 
rupted at wide intervals by absent-minded ejaculations 
wrung from unconscious breasts as the whole size of the 
disaster gradually worked its way home to the realization 
of one spirit after another. 

Some burst out with one thing, some another; the 
German nurse put up her hands and said, "Oh, Schade! 
oh, schrecklich!" But Gerhardt said nothing; or almost 
that. He couldn't word it, I suppose. But he went to 
work, and by dark had everything thoroughly well under 
way for a fresh start in the morning; and in three days' 
time had built a new bust which was a trifle better than 
the old one — and to-morrow we shall put the finishing 
touches on it, and it will be about as good a one as nearly 
anybody can make. 

Yrs Ever 

Mark. 

If you run across anybody who wants a bust, be sure 
and recommend Gerhardt on my say-so. 

But Howells was determinedly for Blaine. "I shall vote for 
Blaine," he replied. "I do not believe he is guilty of the things 
they accuse him of, and I know they are not proved against 
him. As for Cleveland, his private life may be no worse than 
that of most men, but as an enemy of that contemptible, hypo- 

444 

Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



critical, lop-sided morality which says a woman shall suffer all 
the shame of unchastity and man none, I want to see him de- 
stroyed politically by his past. The men who defend him would 
take their wives to the White House if he were president, but 
if he married his concubine — 'made her an honest woman'— 
they would not go near him. I can't stand that." 

Certainly this was sound logic, in that day, at least. But it 
left Clemens far from satisfied. 



To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Elm ira, Sept. 17, '84. 

My dear Howells, — Somehow I can't seem to rest 
quiet under the idea of your voting for Blaine. I believe 
you said something about the country and the party. 
Certainly allegiance to these is well; but as certainly a 
man's first duty is to his own conscience and honor — the 
party of the country come second to that, and never first. 
I don't ask you to vote at all— I only urge you to not soil 
yourself by voting for Blaine. 

When you wrote before, you were able to say the 
charges against him were not proven. But you know 
now that they are proven, and it seems to me that that 
bars you and all other honest and honorable men (who 
arc independently situated) from voting for him. 

It is not necessary to vote for Cleveland; the only 
necessary thing to do, as I understand it, is that a man 
shall keep himself clean, (by withholding his vote for an 
rproper man) even though the party and the country 
go to destruction in consequence. It is not parties that 
make or save countries or that build them to greatness- 
it is clean men, clean ordinary citizens, rank and file, the 
masses. Clean masses are not made by individuals stand- 
ing back till the rest become clean. 

As I said before, I think a man's first duty is to his own 
honor; not to his country and not to his party. Don't be 
offended; I mean no offence. I am not so concerned 
about the rest of the nation, but— well, good-bye. 

Ys Ever Mark. 
11.-1 445 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



There does not appear to be any further discussion of the 
matter between Howells and Clemens. Their letters for a time 
contained no suggestion of politics. 

Perhaps Mark Twain 's own political conscience was not en- 
tirely clear in his repudiation of his party; at least we may 
believe from his next letter that his Cleveland enthusiasm was 
qualified by a willingness to support a Republican who would 
command his admiration and honor. The idea of an eleventh - 
hour nomination was rather startling, whatever its motive. 

To Mr. Pierce, in Boston: 

Hartford, Oct. 22 % '84. 

My dear Mr. Pierce,— You know, as well as I do, that 
the reason the majority of republicans are going to vote 
for Blaine is because they feel that they cannot help them- 
selves. Do not you believe that if Mr. Edmunds would 
consent to run for President, on the Independent ticket — 
even at this late day — he might be elected? 

Well, if he wouldn't consent, but should even stren- 
uously protest and say he wouldn't serve if elected, isn't 
it still wise and fair to nominate him and vote for him ? — 
since his protest would relieve him from all responsibility; 
and he couldn't surely find fault with people for forcing 
a compliment upon him. And do not you believe that his 
name thus compulsorily placed at the head of the Inde- 
pendent column would work absolutely certain defeat to 
Blain and save the country's honor? 

Politicians often carry a victory by springing some dis- 
graceful and rascally mine under the feet of the adversary 
at the eleventh hour; would it not be wholesome to vary 
this thing for once and spring as formidable a mine of a 
better sort under the enemy's works? 

If Edmunds's name were put up, I would vote for him 
in the teeth of all the protesting and blaspheming he 
could do in a month; and there are lots of others who 
would do likewise. 

If this notion is not a foolish and wicked one, won't 
you just consult with some chief Independents, and see 

446 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



if they won't call a sudden convention and whoop the 
thing through? To nominate Edmunds the ist of Novem- 
ber, would be soon enough, wouldn't it? 

With kindest regards to you and the Aldriches, 

Yr Truly 

S. L. Clemens. 

Clemens and Cable set out on their reading-tour in November. 
They were a curiously-assorted pair: Cable was of orthodox 
religion, exact as to habits, neat, prim, all that Clemens was not. 
In the beginning Cable undertook to read the Bible aloud to 
Clemens each evening, but this part of the day's program was 
presently omitted by request. If they spent Sunday in a town, 
Cable was up bright and early visiting the various churches and 
Sunday-schools, while Mark Twain remained at the hotel, in 
bed. reading or asleeo. 



Digitized by Google 



XXV 



THE GREAT YEAR OF 1885. CLEMENS AND CABLE. PUBLICA- 
TION OF "HUCK FINN." THE GRANT MEMOIRS. 
MARK TWAIN AT FIFTY 



THE year 1885 was in some respects the most important, 
certainly the most pleasantly exciting, in Mark Twain's 
life. It was the year in which he entered fully into the pub- 
lishing business and launched one of the most spectacular of 
all publishing adventures, The Personal Memoirs of General U. S. 
Grant. Clemens had not intended to do general publishing 
when he arranged with Webster to become sales-agent for the 
Mississippi book, and later general agent for Buck Finn's ad- 
ventures; he had intended only to handle his own books, be- 
cause he was pretty thoroughly dissatisfied with other publishing 
arrangements. Even the Library of Humor, which Howells, 
with Clark, of the Courant, had put together for him, he left with 
Osgood until that publisher failed, during the spring of 1885. 
Certainly he never dreamed of undertaking anything of the 
proportions of the Grant book. 

He had always believed that Grant could make a book. More 
than once, when they had met, he had urged the General to 
prepare his memoirs for publication. Howells, in his My Mark 
Tivq tft j tcl-ls of going with Clemens to see Grant, then a member 
of the ill-fated firm of Grant and Ward, and how they lunched on 
beans, bacon and coffee brought in from a near-by restaurant. 
It was while they were eating this soldier fare that Clemens- 
very likely abetted by Howells— especially urged the great com- 
mander to prepare his memoirs. But Grant had become a 
financier, as he believed, and the prospect of literary earnings, 
however large, did not appeal to him. Furthermore, he was 
convinced that he was without literary ability and that a book 
by him would prove a failure. 

But then, by and by, came a failure more disastrous than any- 
thing he had foreseen— the downfall of his firm through the Na* 

448 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

poleonic rascality of Ward. General Grant was utterly ruined; 
he was left without income and apparently without the means of 
earning one. It was the period when the great War Series was 
appearing in the Century Magazine. General Grant, hard- 
pressed, was induced by the editors to prepare one or more 
articles, and, finding that he could write them, became inter- 
ested in the idea of a book. It is unnecessary to repeat here 
the story of how the publication of this important work passed 
into the hands of Mark Twain; that is to say, the firm of Charles 
L. Webster & Co., the details having been fully given elsewhere. 1 
We will now return for the moment to other matters, as re- 
ported in order by the letters. Clemens and Cable had continued 
their reading-tour into Canada, and in February found them- 
selves in Montreal. Here they were invited by the Tuque Bleue 
Snow-shoe Club to join in one of their weekly excursions across 
Mt. Royal. They could not go, and the reasons given by Mark 
Twain are not without interest. The letter is to Mr. George 
lies, author of Flame, Electricity, and the Camera, and many 
other useful works. 

To George lies, for the Tuque Bleue Snow-shoe Club, 

Montreal: 

Detroit, February 12, 1885. 

Midnight, PS. 

My dear Iles, — I got your other telegram a while ago, 
and answered it, explaining that I get only a couple of 
hours in the middle of the day for social life. I know it 
doesn't seem rational that a man should have to lie abed 
all day in order to be rested and equipped for talking an 
hour at night, and yet in my case and Cable's it is so. 
Unless I get a great deal of rest, a ghastly dulness settles 
down upon me on the platform, and turns my performance 
into work, and hard work, whereas it ought always to be 
pastime, recreation, solid enjoyment. Usually it is just 
this latter, but that is because I take my rest faithfully, 
and prepare myself to do my duty by my audience. 

I am the obliged and appreciative servant of my brethren 

1 Sec Mark Twain: A Biography, chap. cliv. 

449 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



of the Snow-shoe Club, and nothing in the world would 
delight me more than to come to their house without 
naming time or terms on my own part — but you see how 
it is. My cast iron duty is to my audience— it leaves me no 
liberty and no option. 
With kindest regards to the Club and to you, I am 

Sincerely yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

In the next letter we reach the end of the Clemens-Cable ven- 
ture and get a characteristic summing up of Mark Twain's 
general attitude toward the companion of his travels. It must 
be read only in the clear realization of Mark Twain's attitude 
toward orthodoxy, and his habit of humor. Cable was as 
rigidly orthodox as Mark Twain was revolutionary. The two 
were never anything but the best of friends. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Phil ada. Feb. 27, '#5. 

Mv dear Howells, — To-night in Baltimore, to-morrow 
afternoon and night in Washington, and my four-months 
platform campaign is ended at last. It has been a curious 
experience. It has taught me that Cable's gifts of mind 
are greater and higher than I had suspected. But — 

That "But" is pointing toward his religion. You will 
never, never know, never divine, guess, imagine, how loath- 
some a thing the Christian religion can be made until you 
come to know and study Cable daily and hourly. Mind 
you, I like him; he is pleasant company; I rage and swear 
at him sometimes, but we do not quarrel; we get along 
mighty happily together; but in him and his person I 
have learned to hate all religions. He has taught me to 
abhor and detest the Sabbath-day and hunt up new and 
troublesome ways to dishonor it. 

Nat Goodwin was on the train yesterday. He plays in 
Washington all the coming week. He is very anxious to 
get our Sellers play and play it under changed names. I 
said the only thing I could do would be to write to you. 
Well, I've done it. Ys Ever Mark. 

45o 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Clemens and Webster were often at the house of General 
Grant during these early days of 1885, and it must have been 
Webster who was present with Clemens on the great occasion 
described in the following telegram. It was on the last day and 
hour of President Arthur's administration that the bill was 
passed which placed Ulysses S. Grant as full General with full 
pay on the retired list, and it is said that the congressional 
clock was set back in order that this enactment might become 
a law before the administration changed. General Grant had 
by this time developed cancer and was already in feeble health. 

Telegram to Mrs. Clemens, in Hartford: 

New York, Mar. 4, 188$. 
To Mrs. S. L. Clemens, — We were at General Grant's 
at noon and a telegram arrived that the last act of the 
expiring congress late this morning retired him with full 
General's rank and accompanying emoluments. The 
effect upon him was like raising the dead. We were 
present when the telegram was put in his hand. 

S. L. Clemens. 

Something has been mentioned before of Mark Twain's in- 
vestments and the generally unprofitable habit of them. He 
had a trusting nature, and was usually willing to invest money 
on any plausible recommendation. He was one of thousands 
such, and being a person of distinction he now and then received 
letters of inquiry, complaint, or condolence. A minister wrote 
him that he had bought some stocks recommended by a Hart- 
ford banker and advertised in a religious paper. He added, 
"After I made that purchase they wrote me that you had just 
bought a hundred shares and that you were a 'shrewd' man." 
The writer closed by asking for further information. He 
received it, as follows: 

To the Rev. 7—, in Baltimore: 

Washington, Mch. 2, '£5. 
My dear Sir— I take my earliest opportunity to answer 
your favor of Feb. 23. 

45i 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



B — was premature in calling me a "shrewd man." I 
wasn't one at that time, but am one now — that is, I am 
at least too shrewd to ever again invest in anything put 
on the market by B — . I know nothing whatever about 
the Bank Note Co., and never did know anything about 
it. B — sold me about $4,000 or $5,000 worth of the stock 
at $110, and I own it yet. He sold me $10,000 worth of 
another rose-tinted stock about the same time. I have 
got that yet, also. I judge that a peculiarity of B— 's 
stocks is that they are of the staying kind. I think you 
should have asked somebody else whether I was a shrewd 
man or not — for two reasons: the stock was advertised 
in a religious paper, a circumstance which was very sus- 
picious; and the compliment came to you from a man 
who was interested to make a purchaser of you. I am 
afraid you deserve your loss. A financial scheme adver- 
tised in any religious paper is a thing which any living 
person ought to know enough to avoid; and when the 
factor is added that M. runs that religious paper, a dead 
person ought to know enough to avoid it. 

Very Truly Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 



The story of Buck Finn was having a wide success. Webster 
handled it skilfully, and the sales were large. In almost every 
quarter its welcome was enthusiastic. Here and there, however, 
could be found an exception; Huck's morals were not always 
approved of by library reading-committees. The first instance 
of this kind was reported from Concord, and would seem not 
to have depressed the author-publisher. 

To Chas. L. Webster, in New York: 

Mch i8 9 '85. 

Dear Charley,— The Committee of the Public Library 
of Concord, Mass, have given us a rattling tip-top puff 
which will go into every paper in the country. They have 
expelled Huck from their library as "trash and suitable 

45 2 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



only for the slums." That will sell 25,000 copies for us 
sure. 

Ys S. L. C. 

Perhaps the Concord Free Trade Club had some idea of 
making amends to Mark Twain for the slight put upon his book 
by their librarians, for immediately after the Buck Finn incident 
they notified him of his election to honorary membership. 

Those were the days of "authors' readings," and Clemens and 
Howells not infrequently assisted at these functions, usually 
given as benefits of one kind or another. From the next letter, 
written following an entertainment given for the Longfellow 
memorial, we gather that Mark Twain's opinion of Howells 's 
reading was steadily improving. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, May 5, '85. 
My dbar Howells, — . . . Who taught you to read? 
Observation and thought, I guess. And practice at the 
Tavern Club? — yes; and that was the best teaching of 
all. 

Well, you sent even your daintiest and most delicate 
and fleeting points home to that audience — absolute proof 
of good reading. But you couldn't read worth a damn a 
few years ago. I do not say this to flatter. It is true I 
looked around for you when I was leaving, but you had 
already gone. 

Alas, Osgood has failed at last. It was easy to see 
that he was on the very verge of it a year ago, and it was 
also easy to see that he was still on the verge of it a month 
or two ago; but I continued to hope — but not expect — 
that he would pull through. The Library of Humor is at 
his dwelling house, and he will hand it to you whenever 
you want it. 

To save it from any possibility of getting mixed up in 
the failure, perhaps you had better send down and get it. 
I told him, the other day, that an order of any kind from 
you would be his sufficient warrant for its delivery to you. 

453 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

In two days General Grant has dictated 50 pages of 
foolscap, and thus the Wilderness and Appomattox stand 
for all time in his own words. This makes the second 
volume of his book as valuable as the first. 

He looks mighty well, these latter days. 

Yrs Ever 

Mark. 

"I am exceedingly glad," wrote Howells, "that you approve 
of my reading, for it gives me some hope that I may do something 
on the platform next winter. . . . but I would never read within 
a hundred miles of you, if I could help it. You simply straddled 
down to the footlights and took that house up in the hollow of 
your hand and tickled it." 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Elmira, July 21 % i88s* 
My dear Howells, — You are really my only author; 
I am restricted to you, I wouldn't give a damn for the rest. 

I bored through Middlemarch during the past week, 
with its labored and tedious analyses of feelings and 
motives, its paltry and tiresome people, its unexciting 
and uninteresting story, and its frequent blinding flashes 
of single-sentence poetry, philosophy, wit, and what not, 
and nearly died from the overwork. I wouldn't read 
another of those books for a farm. I did try to read one 
other — Daniel Deronda. I dragged through three chap- 
ters, losing flesh all the time, and then was honest enough 
to quit, and confess to myself that I haven't any romance 
literature appetite, as far as I can see, except for your 
bdoks. 

But what I started to say, was, that I have just read 
Part II of Indian Summer, and to my mind there isn't 
a waste line in it, or one that could be improved. I read 
it yesterday, ending with that opinion; and read it again 
to-day, ending with the same opinion emphasized. I 
haven't read Part I yet, because that number must have 
reached Hartford after we left; but we are going to send 

454 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



down town for a copy, and when it conies I am to read 
both parts aloud to the family. It is a beautiful story, 
and makes a body laugh all the time, and cry inside, and ' 
feel so old and so forlorn; and gives him gracious glimpses * 
of his lost youth that fill him with a measureless regret, and 
build up in him a cloudy sense of his having been a prince, 
once, in some enchanted far-off land, and of being an exile 
now, and desolate — and Lord, no chance ever to get back 
there again ! That is the thing that hurts. Well, you have 
done it with marvelous facility and you make all the 
motives and feelings perfectly clear without analyzing 
the guts out of them, the way George Eliot does. I 
can't stand George Eliot and Hawthorne and those peo- 
ple; I see what they are at a hundred years before they 
get to it and they just tire me to death. And as for "The 
Bostonians," I would rather be damned to John Bunyan's 
heaven than read that. 

Yrs Ever Mark. 

It is as easy to understand Mark Twain's enjoyment of 
Indian Summer as his revolt against Daniel Dcronda and 
The Bostonians. He cared little for writing that did not con- 
vey its purpose in the simplest and most direct terms. It is 
interesting to note that in thanking Clemens for his compli- 
ment Howclls wrote: "What people cannot see is that I analyze 
as little as possible; they go on talking about the analytical 
school, which I am supposed to belong to, and I want to thank 
you for using your eyes. . . . Did you ever read De Foe's 
Roxanaf If not, then read it, not merely for some of the deepest 
insights into the lying, suffering, sinning, well-meaning human 
soul, but for the best and most natural English that a book 
twas ever written in." 

General Grant worked steadily on his book, dictating when 
he could, making brief notes on slips of paper when he could 
no longer speak. Clemens visited him at Mt. McGregor and 
brought the dying soldier the comforting news that enough of 
his books were already sold to provide generously for his family, 
and that the sales would aggregate at least twice as much by 
the end of the year. 

455 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



This was some time in July. On the 23d of that month Gen- 
eral Grant died. Immediately there was a newspaper discussion 
as to the most suitable place for the great chieftain to lie. Mark 
Twain's contribution to this debate, though in the form of an 
open letter, seems worthy of preservation here. 

To the New York "Sim," on the proper place for Grant's 

Tomb: 

To the Editor op The Sun: — Sir, — The newspaper 
atmosphere is charged with objections to New York as a 
place of sepulchre for General Grant, and the objectors 
are strenuous that Washington is the right place. They 
offer good reasons— good temporary reasons— for both of 
these positions. 

But it seems to me that temporary reasons are not 
mete for the occasion. We need to consider posterity 
rather than our own generation. We should select a 
grave which will not merely be in the right place now, but 
will still be in the right place 500 years from now. 

How does Washington promise as to that? You have 
only to hit it in one place to kill it. Some day the west 
will be numerically strong enough to move the seat of 
government; her past attempts are a fair warning that 
when the day comes she will do it. Then the city of 
Washington will lose its consequence and pass out of the 
public view and public talk. It is quite within the possi- 
bilities that, a century hence, people would wonder and say, 
"How did your predecessors come to bury their great 
dead in this deserted place?" 

But as long as American civilization lasts New York 
will last. I cannot but think she has been well and 
wisely chosen as the guardian of a grave which is destined 
to become almost the most conspicuous in the world's 
history. Twenty centuries from now New York will still 
be New York, still a vast city, and the most notable object 
in it will still be the tomb and monument of General Grant. 

I observe that the common and strongest objection to 
New York is that she is not "national ground." Let us 

456 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



give ourselves no uneasiness about that. Wherever Gen- 
eral Grant's body lies, that is national ground. 

S. L. Clemens. 

Elm ira, July 27. 

The letter that follows is very long, but it seems too important 
and too interesting to be omitted in any part. General Grant's 
early indulgence in liquors had long been a matter of wide, 
though not very definite, knowledge. Every one had heard 
how Lincoln, on being told that Grant drank, remarked some- 
thing to the effect that he would like to know what kind of 
whisky Grant used so that he might get some of it for his other 
generals. Henry Ward Beecher, selected to deliver a eulogy 
on the dead soldier, and doubtless wishing neither to ignore the 
matter nor to make too much of it, naturally turned for informa- 
tion to the publisher of Grant's own memoirs, hoping from an 
advance copy to obtain light. 

To Henry Ward Beecher, Brooklyn: 

Elmira, N. Y. Sept. 11, ^5. 

My dear Mr. Beecher —My nephew Webster is in 
Europe making contracts for the Memoirs. Before he 
sailed he came to me with a writing, directed to the 
printers and binders, to this effect: 

"Honor no order for a sight or copy of the Memoirs 
while I am absent, even though it be signed by Mr. 
Clemens himself." 

I gave my permission. There were weighty reasons 
why I should not only give my permission, but hold it a 
matter of honor to not dissolve the order or modify it 
at any time. So I did all of that — said the order should 
stand undisturbed to the end. If a principal could dis- 
solve his promise as innocently as he can dissolve his 
written order unguarded by his promise, I would send 
you a copy of the Memoirs instantly. I did not foresee 
you, or I would have made an exception. 



My idea gained from army men, is that the drunkenness 
(and sometimes pretty reckless spreeing, nights,) ceased 

457 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

before he came East to be Lt. General. (Refer especially 
to Gen. Wm. B. Franklin 1 ) It was while Grant was still 
in the West that Mr. Lincoln said he wished he could find 
out what brand of whisky that fellow used, so he could 
furnish it to some of the other generals. Franklin saw 
Grant tumble from his horse drunk, while reviewing 
troops in New Orleans. The fall gave him a good deal of 
a hurt. He was then on the point of leaving for the 
Chattanooga region. I naturally put "that and that 
together" when I read Gen. O. 0. Howards's article in 
the Christian Union, three or four weeks ago — where he 
mentions that the new General arrived lame from a 
recent accident. (See that article.) And why not write 
Howard ? 

Franklin spoke positively of the frequent spreeing. In 
camp — in time of war. 



Captain Grant was frequently threatened by the Com- 
mandant of his Oregon post with a report to the War 
Department of his conduct unless he modified his intem- 
perance. The report would mean dismissal from the 
service. At last the report had to be made out ; and then, 
so greatly was the captain beloved, that he was privately 
informed, and was thus enabled to rush his resignation 
to Washington ahead of the report. Did the report go, 
nevertheless? I don't know. If it did, it is in the 
War Department now, possibly, and seeable. I got all 
this from a regular army man, but I can't name him 
to save me. 

The only time General Grant ever mentioned liquor to 
me was about last April or possibly May. He said: 

41 If I could only build up my strength! The doctors 
urge whisky and champagne; but I can't take them; I 
can't abide the taste of any kind of liquor." 

Had he made a conquest so complete that even the 

1 If you could see Franklin and talk with him — then he would 
unbosom. 

458 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

taste of liquor was become an offense? Or was he so sore 
over what had been said about his habit that he wanted 
to persuade others and likewise himself that he hadn't 
even ever had any taste for it? It sounded like the latter, 
but that's no evidence. 

He told me in the fall of '84 that there was something 
the matter with his throat, and that at the suggestion of 
his physicians he had reduced his smoking to one cigar a 
day. Then he added, in a casual fashion, that he didn't 
care for that one, and seldom smoked it. 

I could understand that feeling. He had set out to 
conquer not the habit but the inclination — the desire. 
He had gone at the root, not the trunk. It's the perfect 
way and the only true way (I speak from experience.) 
How I do hate those enemies of the human race who go 
around enslaving God's free people with pledges — to quit 
drinking instead of to quit wanting to drink. 

But Sherman and Van Vliet know everything concerning 
Grant; and if you tell them how you want to use the 
facts, both of them will testify. Regular army men have 
no concealments about each other; and yet they make 
their awful statements without shade or color or malice — 
with a frankness and a child-like naivety, indeed, which 
is enchanting — and stupefying. West Point seems to * 
teach them that, among other priceless things not to 
be got in any other college in this world. If we talked 
about our guild-mates as I have heard Sherman, Grant, 
Van Vliet and others talk about theirs— mates with 
whom they were on the best possible terms — we could 
never expect them to speak to us again. 

I am reminded, now, of another matter. The day of 
the funeral I sat an hour over a single drink and several 
cigars with Van Vliet and Sherman and Senator Sher- 
man; and among other things Gen. Sherman said, with 
impatient scorn: 

"The idea of all this nonsense about Grant not being 
able to stand rude language and indelicate stories! Why 

459 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Grant was full of humor, and full of the appreciation of it. 
I have sat with him by the hour listening to Jim Nye's 
yarns, and I reckon you know the style of Jim Nye's 
histories, Clemens. It makes me sick — that newspaper 
nonsense. Grant was no namby-pamby fool, he was a 
man — all over — rounded and complete." 

I wish I had thought of it! I would have said to Gen- 
eral Grant: "Put the drunkenness in the Memoirs — and 
the repentance and reform. Trust the people." 

But I will wager there is not a hint in the book. He 
was sore, there. As much of the book as I have read gives 
no hint, as far as I recollect. 

The sick-room brought out the points of Gen. Grant's 
character — some of them particularly, to wit: 

His patience; his indestructible equability of temper; 
his exceeding gentleness, kindness, forbearance, loving- 
ness, charity; his loyalty: to friends, to convictions, to 
promises, half-promises, infinitesimal fractions and shad- 
ows of promises; (There was a requirement of him 
which I considered an atrocity, an injustice, an outrage; 
I wanted to implore him to repudiate it; Fred Grant 
said, "Save your labor, I know him; he is in doubt as to 
whether he made that half-promise or not — and he will 
give the thing the benefit of the doubt ; he will fulfill that 
half-promise or kill himself trying;" Fred Grant was 
right — he did fulfill it;) his aggravatingly trustful nature; 
his genuineness, simplicity, modesty, diffidence, self- 
depreciation, poverty in the quality of vanity — and, in 
no contradiction of this last, his simple pleasure in the 
flowers and general ruck sent to him by Tom, Dick and 
Harry from everywhere — a pleasure that suggested a 
perennial surprise that he should be the object of so much 
fine attention — he was the most lovable great child in 
the world; (I mentioned his loyalty: you remember Har- 
rison, the colored body-servant? the whole family hated 
him, but that did not make any difference, the General 
always stood at his back, wouldn't allow him to be scolded; 
always excused his failures and deficiencies with the one 

460 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

unvarying formula, "We are responsible for these things 
in his race — it is not fair to visit our fault upon them — 
let him alone;" so they did let him alone, under compul- 
sion, until the great heart that was his shield was taken 
away; then — well they simply couldn't stand him, and 
so they were excusable for determining to discharge him 
— a thing which they mortally hated to do, and by lucky 
accident were saved from the necessity of doing;) his 
toughness as a bargainer when doing business for other 
people or for his country (witness his "terms" at Donel- 
son, Vicksburg, etc.; Fred Grant told me his father 
wound up an estate for the widow and orphans of a friend 
in St. Louis — it took several years; at the end every com- 
plication had been straightened out, and the property 
put upon a prosperous basis; great sums had passed 
through his hands, and when he handed over the papers 
there were vouchers to show what had been done with 
every penny) and his trusting, easy, unexacting fashion 
when doing business for himself (at that same time he 
was paying out money in driblets to a man who was 
running his farm for him — and in his first Presidency he 
paid every one of those driblets again (total, $3,000 F. 
said.) for he hadn't a scrap of paper to show that he had 
ever paid them before; in his dealings with me he would 
not listen to terms which would place my money at risk 
and leave him protected — the thought plainly gave 
him pain, and he put it from him, waved it off with his 
hands, as one does accounts of crushings and mutilations 
— wouldn't listen, changed the subject;) and his fortitude! 
He was under sentence of death last spring; he sat think- 
ing, musing, several days — nobody knows what about; 
then he pulled himself together and set to work to finish 
that book, a colossal task for a dying man. Presently his 
hand gave out; fate seemed to have got him checkmated. 
Dictation was suggested. No, he never could do that; 
had never tried it; too old to learn, now. By and by — 
if he could only do Appomattox — well. So he sent for a 
stenographer, and dictated 9,000 words at a single sit- 
11-3 461 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

ting! — never pausing, never hesitating for a word, never 
repeating — and in the written-out copy he made hardly a 
correction. He dictated again, every two or three days — 
the intervals were intervals of exhaustion and slow re- 
cuperation — and at last he was able to tell me that he 
had written more matter than could be got into the book. 
I then enlarged the book — had to. Then he lost his voice. 
He was not quite done yet, however: — there was no end 
of little plums and spices to be stuck in, here and there; 
and this work he patiently continued, a few lines a day, 
with pad and pencil, till far into July, at Mt. McGregor. 
One day he put his pencil aside, and said he was done — 
there was nothing more to do. If I had been there I 
could have foretold the shock that struck the world three 
days later. 

Well, I've written all this, and it doesn't seem to 
amount to anything. But I do want to help, if I only 
could. I will enclose some scraps from my Autobiography 
— scraps about General Grant — they may be of some 
trifle of use, and they may not — they at least verify known 
traits of his character. My Autobiography is pretty 
freely dictated, but my idea is to jack-plane it a little 
before I die, some day or other; I mean the rude con- 
struction and rotten grammar. It is the only dictating 
I ever did, and it was most troublesome and awkward 
work. You may return it to Hartford. 

Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clbmens. 

The old long-deferred Library of Humor came up again for 
discussion, when in the fall of 1885 Howells associated himself 
with Harper & Brothers. Howells 's contract provided that his 
name was not to appear on any book not published by the 
Harper firm. He wrote, therefore, offering to sell out his in- 
terest in the enterprise for two thousand dollars, in addition to 
the five hundred which he had already received — an amount 
considered to be less than he was to have received as joint author 
and compiler. Mark Twain's answer pretty fully covers the 
details of this undertaking. 

462 

Digitized by Google 



1 
-1 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To W. D. HoweUs, in Boston: 

p^va^ Hartford, Oct, 18, 1885. 

My dear Howells— I reckon it would ruin the book- 
that is, make it necessary to pigeon-hole it and leave it 
unpublished. I couldn't publish it without a very re- 
sponsible name to support my own on the title page, 
because it has so much of my own matter in it. I bought 
Osgood's rights for $3,000 cash, I have paid Clark $500 
and owe him $700 more, which must of course be paid 
whether I publish or not. Yet I fully recognize that I 
have no sort of moral right to let that ancient and pro- 
crastinated contract hamper you in any way, and I most 
certainly won't. So, it is my decision,— after thinking 
over and rejecting the idea of trying to buy permission 
of the Harpers for $2,500 to use your name, (a proposi- 
tion which they would hate to refuse to a man in a per- 
plexed position, and yet would naturally have to refuse 
it,) to pigeon-hole the "Library": not destroy it, but 
merely pigeon-hole it and wait a few years and see what 
new notion Providence will take concerning it. He will 
not desert us now, after putting in four licks to our one 
on this book all this time. It really seems in a sense dis- 
courteous not to call it "Providence's Library of Humor." 

Now that deal is all settled, the next question is, do 
you need and must you require that $2,000 now? Since 
Jast March, you know, I am carrying a mighty load, 
1 solitary and alone — General Grant's book — and must 
carry it till the first volume is 30 days old (Jan. 1st) 
before the relief money will begin to flow in. From now 
till the first of January every dollar is as valuable to me 
as it could be to a famishing tramp. If you can wait till 
then — I mean without discomfort, without inconvenience 
— it will be a large accommodation to me; but I will not 
allow you to do this favor if it will discommode you. So, 
speak right out, frankly, and if you need the money I will 
go out on the highway and get it, using violence, if 
necessary. 

h 463 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Mind, I am not in financial difficulties, and am not 
going to be. I am merely a starving beggar standing 
outside the door of plenty — obstructed by a Yale time- 
lock which is set for Jan. ist. I can stand it, and stand 
it perfectly well; but the days do seem to fool along con- 
siderable slower than they used to. 

I am mighty glad you are with the Harpers. I have 
noticed that good men in their employ go there to stay. 

Yours ever, Mark. 

In the next letter we begin to get some idea of the size of 
Mark Twain's first publishing venture, and a brief summary of 
results may not be out of place here. 

The Grant Life was issued in two volumes. In the early 
months of the year when the agents' canvass was just beginning, 
Mark Twain, with what seems now almost clairvoyant vision, 
prophesied a sale of three hundred thousand sets. The actual 
sales ran somewhat more than this number. On February 27, 
1886, Charles L. Webster & Co. paid to Mrs. Grant the largest 
single royalty check in the history of book-publishing. The 
amount of it was two hundred thousand dollars. Subsequent 
checks increased the aggregate return to considerably more 
than double this figure. In a memorandum made by Clemens 
in the midst of the canvass he wrote." 

"During 100 consecutive days the sales (i . e., subscriptions) of 
General Grant's book averaged 3,000 sets (6,000 single volumes) 
per day. Roughly stated, Mrs. Grant's income during all that 
time was $5,000 a day." 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hotel Normandib 

New York, Dec. 2, '£5. 

My dear Howells, — I told Webster, this afternoon, 
to send you that $2,000; but he is in such a rush, these 
first days of publication, that he may possibly forget it; 
so I write lest I forget it too. Remind me, if he should 
forget. When I postponed you lately, I did it because I 
thought I should be cramped for money until January, 
but that has turned out to be an error, so I hasten to 
cut short the postponement. 

464 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I judge by the newspapers that you are in Auburndale, 
but I don't know it officially. 

I've got the first volume launched safely; consequently 
half of the suspense is over, and I am that much nearer 
the goal. We've bound and shipped 200,000 books; and 
by the 10th shall finish and ship the remaining 125,000 
of the first edition. I got nervous and came down to 
help hump-up the binderies; and I mean to stay here 
pretty much all the time till the first days of March, 
when the second volume will issue. Shan't have so much 
trouble, this time, though, if we get to press pretty soon, 
because we can get more binderies then than are to be 
had in front of the holidays. One lives and learns. I 
find it takes 7 binderies four months to bind 325,000 
books. 

This is a good book to publish. I heard a canvasser 
say, yesterday, that while delivering eleven books he took 
7 new subscriptions. But we shall be in a hell of a fix if 
that goes on — it will "ball up" the binderies again. 

Yrs ever 

Mark. 

November 30th that year was Mark Twain's fiftieth birthday, 
an event noticed by the newspapers generally, and especially 
« x-r.v.1 by many of his friends. Warner, Stockton and many 
others sent letters; Andrew Lang contributed a fine poem; 
also Oliver Wendell Holmes — the latter by special request of 
Miss Gilder — for the Critic. These attentions came as a sort of 
crowning happiness at the end of a golden year. At no time in 
his life were Mark Twain's fortunes and prospects brighter; 
he had a beautiful family and a perfect home. Also, he had 
£reat prosperity. The reading -tour with Cable had been a fine 
success. His latest book, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, 
had added largely to his fame and income. The publication of 
the Grant Memoirs had been a dazzling triumph. Mark Twain 
had become recognized, not only as America's most distinguished 
author, but as its most envied publisher. And now, with his 
fiftieth birthday, had come this laurel from Holmes, last of the 
Brahmins, to add a touch of glory to all the rest. We feel his 
exaltation in his note of acknowledgment. 

4 6 S 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, in Boston: 

Dear Mr. Holmes,— I shall never be able to tell you 
the half of how proud you have made me. If I could 
you would say you were nearly paid for the trouble you 
took. And then the family: If I can convey the electrical 
surprise and gratitude and exaltation of the wife and the 
children last night, when they happened upon that Critic 
where I had, with artful artlessness, spread it open and 
retired out of view to see what would happen — well, it 
was great and fine and beautiful to see, and made me feel 
as the victor feels when the shouting hosts march by; 
and if you also could have seen it you would have said 
the account was squared. For I have brought them up 
in your company, as in the company of a warm and 
friendly and beneficent but far-distant sun; and so, 
for you to do this thing was for the sun to send down 
out of the skies the miracle of a special ray and transfigure 
me before their faces. I knew what that poem would be 
to them ; I knew it would raise me up to remote and shin- 
ing heights in their eyes, to very fellowship with the cham- 
bered Nautilus itself, and that from that fellowship they 
could never more dissociate me while they should live; 
and so I made sure to be by when the surprise should 
come. 

Charles Dudley Warner is charmed with the poem for 
its own felicitous sake; and so indeed am I, but more 
because it has drawn the sting of my fiftieth year; taken 
away the pain of it, the grief of it, the somehow shame 
of it, and made me glad and proud it happened. 
With reverence and affection, 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Holmes wrote with his own hand: "Did Miss Gilder tell you 
I had twenty-three letters spread out for answer when her sug- 
gestion came about your anniversary? I stopped my corre- 
spondence and made my letters wait until the lines were done." 

4 66 



Digitized by Google 



XXVI 



LETTERS, 1886-87. JANE CLEMENS'S ROMANCE. UNMAILBD 

LETTERS, ETC. 

WHEN Clemens had been platforming with Cable and 
returned to Hartford for his Christmas vacation, the 
Warner and Clemens families had joined in preparing for him 
a surprise performance of The Prince and the Pauper. The 
Clemens household was always given to theatricals, and it was 
about this time that scenery and a stage were prepared — mainly 
by the sculptor Gerhard t — for these home performances, after 
which productions of The Prince and the Pauper were given 
with considerable regularity to audiences consisting of parents 
and invited friends. The subject is a fascinating one, but it 
has been dwelt upon elsewhere. 1 We get a glimpse of one of 
these occasions as well as of Mark Twain's financial progress in 
the next brief note. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Jan. j, '86. 

My dear Howells, — The date set for the Prince and 
Pauper play is ten days hence — Jan. 13. I hope you and 
Pilla can take a train that arrives here during the day; the 
one that leaves Boston toward the end of the afternoon 
would be a trifle late; the performance would have 
already begun when you reached the house. 

I'm out of the woods. On the last day of the year I 
had paid out $182,000 on the Grant book and it was 
totally free from debt. 

Yrs ever Mark. 

■ In Mark Twain: A Biography, chaps, clii and clx. 

467 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Mark Twain's mother was a woman of sturdy character and 
with a keen sense of humor and tender sympathies. Her hus- 
band, John Marshall Clemens, had been a man of high moral 
character, honored by all who knew him, respected and appar- 
ently loved by his wife. No one would ever have supposed that 
during all her years of marriage, and almost to her death, she 
carried a secret romance that would only be told at last in the 
weary disappointment of old age. It is a curious story, and it 
came to light in this curious way: 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, May 10, '86. 

My dear Howells, — . . . . Here's a secret. A most 
curious and pathetic romance, which has just come to 
light. Read these things, but don't mention them. Last 
fall, my old mother — then 82 — took a notion to attend a 
convention of old settlers of the Mississippi Valley in an 
Iowa town. My brother's wife was astonished; and repre- 
sented to her the hardships and fatigues of such a trip, and 
said my mother might possibly not even survive them ; 
and said there could be no possible interest for her in 
such a meeting and such a crowd. But my mother in- 
sisted, and persisted; and finally gained her point. They 
started; and all the way my mother was young again with 
excitement, interest, eagerness, anticipation. They reached 
the town and the hotel. My mother strode with the same 
eagerness in her eye and her step, to the counter, and said: 

"Is Dr. Barrett of St. Louis, here?" 

14 No. He was here, but he returned to St. Louis this 
morning." 

"Will he come again?" 

"No." 

My mother turned away, the fire all gone from her, 
and said, " Let us go home." 

They went straight back to Keokuk. My mother sat 
silent and thinking for many days — a thing which had 
never happened before. Then one day she said : 

" I will tell you a secret. When I was eighteen, a young 

468 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



medical student named Barrett lived in Columbia (Ky.) 
eighteen miles away; and he used to ride over to see me. 
This continued for some time. I loved him with my whole 
heart, and I knew that he felt the same toward me, though 
no words had been spoken. He was too bashful to speak — 
he could not do it. Everybody supposed we were engaged 
— took it for granted we were — but we were not. By and 
by there was to be a party in a neighboring town, and he 
wrote my uncle telling him his feelings, and asking him 
to drive me over in his buggy and let him (Barrett) drive 
me back, so that he might have that opportunity to pro- 
pose. My uncle should have done as he was asked, with- 
out explaining anything to me; but instead, he read me 
the letter; and then, of course, I could not go — and did 
not. He (Barrett) left the country presently, and I, to 
stop the clacking tongues, and to show him that / did not 
care, married, in a pet. In all these sixty-four years I 
have not seen him since. I saw in a paper that he was 
going to attend that Old Settlers' Convention. Only 
three hours before we reached that hotel, he had been 
standing there!" 

Since then, her memory is wholly faded out and gone; 
and now she writes letters to the school-mates who had 
been dead forty years, and wonders why they neglect her 
and do not answer. 

Think of her carrying that pathetic burden in her old 
heart sixty-four years, and no human being ever sus- 
pecting it! Yrs ever, Mark. 

We do not get the idea from this letter that those two long- 
ago sweethearts quarreled, but Mark Twain once spoke of their 
having done so, and there may have been a disagreement, assum- 
ing that there was a subsequent meeting. It does not matter, 
now. In speaking of it, Mark Twain once said : 14 It is as pathetic 
a romance as any that has crossed the field of my personal ex- 
perience in a long lifetime." 1 

1 When Mark Twain: A Biography was written this letter had 
not come to light, and the matter was stated there in accordance 
with Mark Twain's latest memory of it. 

469 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Howells wrote: "After all, how poor and hackneyed all the 
inventions are compared with the simple and stately facts. Who 
could have imagined such a heart-break as that? Yet it went 
along with the fulfillment of every -day duty and made no more 
noise than a grave under foot. I doubt if fiction will ever get 
the knack of such things." 

Jane Clemens now lived with her son Orion and his wife, in 
Keokuk, where she was more contented than elsewhere. In 
these later days her memory had become erratic, her realiza- 
tion of events about her uncertain, but there were times when 
she was quite her former self, remembering clearly and talking 
with her old-time gaiety of spirit. Mark Twain frequently sent 
her playful letters to amuse her, letters full of such boyish 
gaiety as had amused her long years before. The one that 
follows is a fair example. It was written after a visit which 
Clemens and his family had paid to Keokuk. 

To Jane Clemens, in Keokuk: 

Elm ira, Aug. 7, '86. 

Dear Ma, — I heard that Molly and Orion and Pamela 
had been sick, but I see by your letter that they are much 
better now, or nearly well. When we visited you a month 
ago, it seemed to us that your Keokuk weather was pretty 
hot; Jean and Clara sat up in bed at Mrs. McElroy's and 
cried about it, and so did I; but I judge by your letter 
that it has cooled down, now, so that a person is com- 
paratively comfortable, with his skin off. Well it did need 
cooling; I remember that I burnt a hole in my shirt, there, 
with some ice cream that fell on it; and Miss Jenkins 
told me they never used a stove, but cooked their meals 
on a marble-topped table in the drawing-room, just with 
the natural heat. If anybody else had told me, I would 
not have believed it. I was told by the Bishop of Keokuk 
that he did not allow crying at funerals, because it scalded 
the furniture. If Miss Jenkins had told me that, I would 
have believed it. This reminds me that you speak of Dr. 
Jenkins and his family as if they were strangers to me. 
Indeed they are not. Don't you suppose I remember 
gratefully how tender the doctor was with Jean when she 

470 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



hurt her arm, and how quickly he got the pain out of the 
hurt, whereas I supposed it was going to last at least an 
hour? No, I don't forget some things as easily as I do 
others. 

Yes, it was pretty hot weather. Now here, when a 
person is going to die, he is always in a sweat about where 
he is going to; but in Keokuk of course they don't care, 
l>ecause they are fixed for everything. It has set me re- 
flecting, it has taught me a lesson. By and by, when my 
health fails, I am going to put all y maffairs in order, and 
bid good-bye to my friends here, and kill all the people 
I don't like, and go out to Keokuk and prepare for death. 

They are all well in this family, and we all send love. 

Affly Your Son 

Sam. 

The ways of city officials and corporations are often past 
understanding, and Mark Twain sometimes found it necessary 
to write picturesque letters of protest. The following to a 
Hartford lighting company is a fair example of these documents. 

To a gas and electric-lighting company, in Hartford: 

Gentlemen, — There are but two places in our whole 
street where lights could be of any value, by any accident, 
and you have measured and appointed your intervals so 
ingeniously as to leave each of those places in the centre 
of a couple of hundred yards of solid darkness. When I 
noticed that you were setting one of your lights in such 
a way that I could almost see how to get into my gate at 
night, I suspected that it was a piece of carelessness on 
the part of the workmen, and would be corrected as soon 
as you should go around inspecting and find it out. My 
judgment was right; it is always right, when you are 
concerned. For fifteen years, in spite of my prayers and 
tears, you persistently kept a gas lamp exactly half way 
between my gates, so that I couldn't find either of them 
after dark; and then furnished such execrable gas that I 
had to hang a danger signal on the lamp post to keep 

471 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

teams from running into it, nights. Now I suppose your 
present idea is, to leave us a little more in the dark. 

Don't mind us — out our way; we possess but one vote 
apiece, and no rights which you are in any way bound to 
respect. Please take your electric light and go to — but 
never mind, it is not for me to suggest; you will probably 
find the way; and any way you can reasonably count on 

if you lose your bearings. 

S. L. Clemens. 

Frequently Clemens did not send letters of this sort after they 
were written. Sometimes he realized the uselessness of such 
protest, sometimes the mere writing of them had furnished the 
necessary relief, and he put the letter away, or into the waste- 
basket, and wrote something more temperate, or nothing at 
all. A few such letters here follow. 

Clemens was all the time receiving application from people 
who wished him to recommend one article or another; books, 
plays, tobacco, and what not. They were generally persistent 
people, unable to accept a polite or kindly denial. Once he set 
down some remarks on this particular phase of correspondence. 
He wrote: 

I 

No doubt Mr. Edison has been offered a large interest 
in many and many an electrical project, for the use of 
his name to float it withal. And no doubt all men who 
have achieved for their names, in any line of activity what- 
ever, a sure market value, have been familiar with this 
sort of solicitation. •Reputation is a hall-mark: it can 
remove doubt from pure silver, and it can also make the 
plated article pass for pure. 

And so, people without a hall-mark of their own are 
always trying to get the loan of somebody else's. 

As a rule, that kind of a person sees only one side of 
the case. He sees that his invention or his painting or 
his book is— apparently— a trifle better than you your- 
self can do, therefore why shouldn't you be willing to 

472 



Digitized by GoogI 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



put your hall-mark on it? You will be giving the pur- 
chaser his full money's worth; so who is hurt, and where 
is the harm? Besides, are you not helping a struggling 
fellow-craftsman, and is it not your duty to do that? 

That side is plenty clear enough to him, but he can't 
and won't see the other side, to-wit: that you are a rascal 
if you put your hall-mark upon a thing which you did not 
produce yourself, howsoever good it may be. How simple 
that is; and yet there are not two applicants in a hundred 
who can be made to see it. 

When one receives an application of this sort, his first 
emotion is an indignant sense of insult; his first deed is 
the penning of a sharp answer. He blames nobody but 
that other person. That person is a very base being; he 
must be; he would degrade himself for money, otherwise 
it would not occur to him that you would do such a thing. 
But all the same, that application has done its work^and 
taken you down in your own estimation. ) You recognize 
that everybody hasn't as high an opinion of you as you 
have pf yourself; and in spite of you there ensues an 
interval during which you are not in your own estimation 
as fine a.J*kd as-yoiijarere before. 

However, being old and experienced, you do not mail 
your sharp letter, but leave it lying a day. That saves 
you. For by that time you have begun to reflect that 
you are a j>erson who deals in exaggerations — and exag- 
gerations are lies. You meant yours to be playful, and 
thought you made them unmistakably so. But you 
couldn't make them playfulnesses to a man who has no 
sense of the playful and can see nothing but the serious 
side of things. You rattle on quite playfully, and with 
measureless extravagance, about how you wept at the 
tomb of Adam; and all in good time you find to your 
astonishment that no end of people took you at your 
word and believed you. And presently they find out 
that you were not in earnest. They have been deceived; 
therefore, (as they argue — and there is a sort of argument 
in it,) you are a deceiver. If you will deceive in one way, 

473 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



why shouldn't you in another? So they apply for the 
use of your trade-mark. You are amazed and affronted. 
You retort that you are not that kind of person. Then 
they are amazed and affronted ; and wonder " since when ?" 

By this time you have got your bearings. You realize 
that perhaps there is a little blame on both sides. You 
are in the right frame, now. So you write a letter void 
of offense, declining. You mail this one; you pigeon-hole 
the other. 

That is, being old and experienced, you do, but early 
in your career, you don't: you mail the first one. 



An enthusiast who had a new system of musical nota- 
tion, wrote to me and suggested that a magazine article 
from me, contrasting the absurdities of the old system 
with the simplicities of his new one, would be sure to 
make a "rousing hit." He shouted and shouted over the 
marvels wrought by his system, and quoted the handsome 
compliments which had been paid it by famous musical 
people; but he forgot to tell me what his notation was 
like, or what its simplicities consisted in. So I could not 
have written the article if I had wanted to — which I 
didn't; because I hate strangers with axes to grind. I 
wrote him a courteous note explaining how busy I was — 
I always explain how busy I am— and casually drooped 
this remark : 

"I judge the X-X notation to be a rational mode of 
representing music, in place of the prevailing fashion, 
which was the invention of an idiot." 

Next mail he asked permission to print that meaning- 
less remark. I answered, no — courteously, but still, no; 
explaining that I could not afford to be placed in the 
attitude of trying to influence people with a mere worth- 
less guess. What a scorcher I got, next mail ! Such irony! 
such sarcasm, such caustic praise of my superhonorable 

474 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

loyalty to the public! And withal, such compassion for 
my stupidity, too, in not being able to understand my 
own language. I cannot remember the words of this letter 
broadside, but there was about a page used up in turning 
this idea round and round and exposing it in different 
lights. 

Unmailed Answer: 

Dear Sir,— What is the trouble with you? If it is 
your viscera, you cannot have them taken out and reor- 
ganized a moment too soon. I mean, if they are inside. 
But if you are composed of them, that is another matter. 
Is it your brain ? But it could not be your brain. Possibly 
it is your skull: you want to look out for that. Some 
people, when they get an idea, it pries the structure apart. 
Your system of notation has got in there, and couldn't 
find room, without a doubt that is what the trouble is. 
Your skull was not made to put ideas in. it was made to 
throw potatoes at. Yours Truly. 

Mailed Answer: 

Dear Sir, — Come, come — take a walk; you disturb 
the children. Yours Truly. 

There was a day, now happily nearly over, when certain news- 
papers made a practice of inviting men distinguished in any 
walk of life to give their time and effort without charge to ex- 
press themselves on some subject of the day, or perhaps they 
were asked to send their favorite passages in prose or verse, with 
the reasons why. Such symposiums were "features" that cost 
the newspapers only the writing of a number of letters, station- 
ery, and postage. To one such invitation Mark Twain wrote 
two replies. They follow herewith: 

Unmailed Answer: 

Dear Sir,— I have received your proposition — which 
you have imitated from a pauper London periodical which 

475 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



had previously imitated the idea of this sort of mendi- 
cancy from seventh-rate American journalism, where it 
originated as a variation of the inexpensive "interview." 

Why do you buy Associated Press dispatches? To 
make your paper the more salable, you answer. But 
why don't you try to beg them? Why do you discrim- 
inate? I can sell my stuff; why should I give it to you? 
Why don't you ask me for a shirt? What is the difference 
between asking me for the worth of a shirt and asking me 
for the shirt itself? Perhaps you didn't know you were 
begging. I would not use that argument — it makes the 
user a fool. The passage of poetry — or prose, if you will 
— which has taken deepest root in my thought, and which 
I oftenest return to and dwell upon with keenest no mat- 
ter what, is this: That the proper place for journalists 
who solicit literary charity is on the street corner with 
their hats in their hands. 

Mailed Answer: 

Dear Sir, — Your favor of recent date is received, but 
I am obliged by press of work to decline. 

The manager of a traveling theatrical company wrote that 
he had taken the liberty of dramatizing Tom Sawyer, and would 
like also the use of the author's name — the idea being to convey 
to the public that it was a Mark Twain play. In return for 
this slight favor the manager sent an invitation for Mark Twain 
to come and see the play — to be present on the opening night, 
as it were, at his (the manager's) expense. He added that if 
the play should be a go in the cities there might be some "ar- 
rangement" of profits. Apparently these inducements did not 
appeal to Mark Twain. The long unmailed reply is the more 
interesting, but probably the briefer one that follows it was 
quite as effective. 

U nmailed Answer: 

Hartford, Sept, 8, '$7. 
Dear Sir,— And so it has got around to you, at last; 
and you also have "taken the liberty." You are No. 

476 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



1365. When 1364 sweeter and better people, including 
the author, have 4 4 tried" to dramatize Tom Sawyer and 
did not arrive, what sort of show do you suppose you 
stand? That is a book, dear sir, which cannot be drama- 
tized. One might as well try to dramatize any other hymn. 
Tom Sawyer is simply a hymn, put into prose form to give 
it a worldly air. 

Why the pale doubt that flitteth dim and nebulous 
athwart the forecastle of your third sentence? Have no 
fears. Your piece will be a Go. It will go out the back 
door on the first night. They've all done it — the 1364. 
So will — 1365. Not one of us ever thought of the simple 
device of half-soling himself with a stove-lid. Ah, what 
suffering a little hindsight would have saved us. Treasure 
this hint. 

How kind of you to invite me to the funeral. Go to; 
I have attended a thousand of them. I have seen Tom 
Sawyer's remains in all the different kinds of dramatic 
shrouds there are. You cannot start anything fresh. Are 
you serious when you propose to pay my expence — if that 
is the Susquehannian way of spelling it? And can you 
be aware that I charge a hundred dollars a mile when I 
travel for pleasure? Do you realize that it is 432 miles 
to Susquehanna? Would it be handy for you to send 
me the $43,200 first, so I could be counting it as I come 
along; because railroading is pretty dreary to a sensitive 
nature when there's nothing sordid to buck at for Zeit- 
vertreib. 

Now as I understand it, dear and magnanimous 1365, 
you are going to re-create Tom Sawyer dramatically, and 
then do me the compliment to put me in the bills as father 
of this shady offspring. Sir, do you know that this kind 
of a compliment has destroyed people before now? Listen. 

Twenty-four years ago, I was strangely handsome. The 
remains of it are still visible through the rifts of time. I 
was so handsome that human activities ceased as if spell- 
bound when I came in view, and even inanimate things 
stopped to look— like locomotives, and district messenger 
M 477 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



boys and so-on. In San Francisco, in the rainy season I 
was often mistaken for fair weather. Upon one occasion 
I was traveling in the Sonora region, and stopped for an 
hour's nooning, to rest my horse and myself. All the town 
came out to look. The tribes of Indians gathered to look. 
A Piute squaw named her baby for me, — a voluntary 
compliment which pleased me greatly. Other attentions 
were paid me. Last of all arrived the president and faculty 
of Sonora University and offered me the post of Professor 
of Moral Culture and the Dogmatic Humanities; which 
I accepted gratefully, and entered at once upon my duties. 
But my name had pleased the Indians, and in the deadly 
kindness of their hearts they went on naming their babies 
after me. I tried to stop it, but the Indians could not 
understand why I should object to so manifest a compli- 
ment. The thing grew and grew and spread and spread 
and became exceedingly embarrassing. The University 
stood it a couple of years; but then for the sake of the 
college they felt obliged to call a halt, although I had the 
sympathy of the whole faculty. The president himself 
said to me, " I am as sorry as I can be for you, and would 
still hold out if there were any hope ahead ; but you see 
how it is: there are a hundred and thirty-two of them 
already, and fourteen precincts to hear from. The cir- 
cumstance has brought your name into most wide and 
unfortunate renown. It causes much comment — I believe 
that that is not an over-statement. Some of this comment 
is palliative, but some of it — by patrons at a distance, who 
only know the statistics without the explanation, — is 
offensive, and in some cases even violent. Nine students 
have been called home. The trustees of the college have 
been growing more and more uneasy all these last months 
— steadily along with the implacable increase in your cen- 
sus — and I will not conceal from you that more than once 
they have touched upon the expediency of a change in the 
Professorship of Moral Culture. The coarsely sarcastic 
editorial in yesterday's Alta, — headed Give the Moral 
Acrobat a Rest — has brought things to a crisis, and I am 

478 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

charged with the unpleasant duty of receiving your 
resignation." 

I know you only mean me a kindness, dear 1365, but 
it is a most deadly mistake. Please do not name your 
Injun for me. Truly Yours. 

Mailed Answer: 

New York, Sept. 8. 1887. 
Dear Sir,— Necessarily I cannot assent to so strange a 
proposition. And I think it but fair to warn you that if 
you put the piece on the stage, you must take the legal 
consequences. 

Yours respectfully, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Before the days of international copyright no American 
author's books were pirated more freely by Canadian publishers 
than those of Mark Twain. It was always a sore point with 
him that these books, cheaply printed, found their way into the 
United States, and were sold in competition with his better edi- 
tions. The law on the subject seemed to be rather hazy, and its • 
various interpretations exasperating. In the next unmailed 
letter Mark Twain relieves himself to a misguided official. 
The letter is worth reading today, if for no other reason, to show 
the absurdity of copyright conditions which prevailed at that 
time. I 

Unmailed Letter to H. C. Christiancy, on book Piracy: 

Hartford, Dec. i8 % '87. 

H. C. Christiancy, Esq. 

Dear Sir, — As I understand it, the position of the 
U. S. Government is this: If a person be captured on 
the border with counterfeit bonds in his hands — bonds 
of the N. Y. Central Railway, for instance — the procedure 
in his case shall be as follows: 

1. If the N. Y. C. have not previously filed in the several 
police offices along the border, proof of ownership of the 
originals of the bonds, the government officials must col- 

479 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



lect a duty on the counterfeits, and then let them go ahead 
and circulate in this country. 

2. But if there is proof already on file, then the N. Y. C. 
may pay the duty and take the counterfeits. 

But in no case will the United States consent to go 
without its share of the swag. It is delicious. The biggest 
and proudest government on earth turned sneak-thief; 
collecting pennies on stolen property, and 
with a greasy and libidinous leer; (going i 
with foreign thieves to rob its own children 
child escapes the foreigner, descending to the abysmal 
baseness of hanging on and robbing the infant all alone 
by itself ! Dear sir, this is not any more respectable than 
for a father to collect toll on the forced prostitution of bis 
own daughter; in fact it is the same thing. IJpon these 
terms, what is a U. S. custom house but a " fence? " That 
is all it is: a legalized trader in stolen goods. 

And this nasty law, this filthy law, this unspeakable 
law calls itself a "regulation for the protection^ owner s 
of copyright!" Can Sarcasm go further than that? Tn 
what way does it protect them? Inspiration itself could 
not furnish a rational answer to that question. Whom 
does it protec t, then? Nobody, as far as I can see, but 
the foreign Thief — sometimes — and his fellow-footpad the 
U. S. government, all the time. What could the Central 
Company do with the counterfeit bondslaf ter it had bought 
them of the star spangled banner Master-thief fl Sell 
them at a dollar apiece and fetch down the market for 
the genuine hundred-dollar bond? What could I do with 
that 20-cent copy of "Roughing It" which the United 
States has collared on the border and is waiting to release 
to me for cash in case I am willing to come down to its 
moral level And help rob myself? Sell it at ten or fifteen 
cents — duty added — and destroy the market for the 
original $3,50 book? Who ever did invent that law? I 
would like to know the name of that immortal jackass. 

Dear sir, I appreciate your courtesy* in stretching your 
authority in the desire to do me a kindness, and I sin- 

480 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



cerely thank you for it. But I have no use for that hook; 
and if I were even starving for it I would not pay duty on 
in either to get it or suppress it. No doubt there are ways 
in which I might consent to go into partnership with 
thieves and fences, but this is not one/>f them. This one 
revolts the re mains of mv selLaapfidEj my stomach. 

I think I could companion with a highwayman who 
carried a shot-gun and took many risks; yes, I think I 
should like that if I were younger; but to go in with a 
big rich government that robs paupers, and the widows 
and orphans of paupers and takes no risk — why the 
thought just gags me. 

Oh, no, I shall never pay any duties on pirated books 
of mine. I am much too respectable for that — yet awhile. 
But here— one thing that grovels me is this: as far as I 
can discover — while freely granting that the U. S. copy- 
right laws are far and away the most idiotic that exist 
anywhere on the face of the earth — they don't authorize 
the government to admit pirated books into this country, 
toll or no toll. And so I think that that regulation is the 
invention of one of those people — as a rule, early stricken 
of God, intellectually— the departmental interpreters of 
the laws, in Washington. They can always be depended 
on to take any reasonably good law and interpret the 
common sense all out of it. They can be depended on, 
every time' to defeat a good law, and make it inoperative 
— yes, and utterly jjotesque, too, mere matter for laughter 
and derision. Take some of the decisions of the Post-office 
Department, for instance — though I do not mean to sug- 
gest that that asylum is any worse than the others for 
the breeding and nourishing of incredible lunatics — I 
merely instance it because it happens to be the first to 
come into my mind. ^Take that case of a few years ago 
where the P. M. GeneraTsuddenly issued an edict requiring 
you to add the name of the State after Boston, New York, 
Chicago, &c, in your superscriptions, on pain of having 
your letter stopped and forwarded to the dead-letter 
office; yes, and I believe he required the county, too. He 

481 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

made one little concession in favor of New York: you 
could say "New York City* 9 and stop there; but if you 
left off the "city," you must add "N. Y. M to your "New 
York." Why, it threw the business of the whole country 
into chaos and brought commerce almost to a standstill. 
Now think of that! When that man goes to— to — well, 
wherever he is going to — we shan't want the microscopic 
details of his address. I guess we can find him. 

Well, as I was saying, J believe that this whole paltry 
and ridiculous swindle is a pure creation of one of those 
cabbages that used to be at the head of one of those 
Retreats down there — Departments, you know — and that 
you will find it so, if you will look into it. And moreover 
—but land, I reckon we are both tired by this time. 

Truly Yours, 

Mark Twain. 



Digitized by Google 



XXVII 



MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS OP 1887. LITERARY ARTICLES. 
PEACEPUL DAYS AT THE FARM. PAVORITE READING. 
APOLOGY TO MRS. CLEVELAND, ETC. 

X I 7E have seen in the preceding chapter how unknown 



V y aspirants in one field or another were always seeking to 
benefit by Mark Twain's reputation. Once he remarked, "The 
symbol of the human race ought to be an ax; every human 
being has one concealed about him somewhere." He declared 
when a stranger called on him, or wrote to him, in nine cases out 
of ten he could distinguish the gleam of the ax almost immedi- 
ately. The following letter is closely related to those of the 
foregoing chapter, only that this one was mailed — not once, 
but many times, in some form adapted to the specific applicant. 
It does not matter to whom it was originally written, the name 
would not be recognized. 



To Mrs. T. — Concerning unearned credentials, etc. 



My dear Madam— It is an idea which many people 
have had, but it is of no value. I have seen it tried out 
many and many a time. I have seen a lady lecturer urged 
and urged upon the public in a lavishly complimentary 
document signed by Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes and 
some others of supreme celebrity, but — there was nothing 
in her and she failed. If there had been any great merit 
in her she never would have needed those men's help and 
(at her rather mature age,) would never have consented 



to ask for it. 

There is an unwritten law about human successes, and 




Haetford, 1887. 



483 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



your sister must bow to that law, she must submit to its 



1. No occupation without an apprenticeship. 

2. No pay to the apprentice. 

This law stands right in the way of the subaltern who 
wants to be a General before he has smelt powder; and 
it stands (and should stand) in everybody's way who 
applies for pay or position before he has served his appren- 
ticeship and proved himself. Your sister's course is per- 
fectly plain. Let her enclose this letter to Maj. J. B. 
Pond, and offer to lecture a year for $10 a week and her 
expenses, the contract to be annullable by him at any 
time, after a month's notice, but not annullable by her at 
all. The second year, he to have her services, if he wants 
them, at a trifle under the best price offered her by anybody 
else. 

She can learn her trade in those two years, and then be 
entitled to remuneration — but she can not learn it in any 
less time than that, unless she is a human miracle. 

Try it, and do not be afraid. It is the fair and right 
thing. If she wins, she will win squarely and righteously, 
and never have to blush. 



Hbwells wrote, in February, offering to get a publisher to 
take the Library of Humor off Mark Twain's hands. Howells 
had been paid twenty-six hundred dollars for the work on it, 
and his conscience hurt him when he reflected that the book 
might never be used. In this letter he also refers to one of the 
disastrous inventions in which Clemens had invested — a method 
of casting brass dies for stamping book-covers and wall-paper. 
Howells 's purpose was to introduce something of the matter 
into his next story. Mark Twain's reply gives us a light on this 



Hartford, Feb. is, '87. 
Dear Howells — I was in New York five days ago, 
and Webster mentioned the Library, and proposed to 

484 



requi 



ts. In brief this law is: 



Truly yours, 



S. L. Clemens. 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



publish it a year or a year and half hence. I have written 
him your proposition to-day. (The Library is part of the 
property of the C. L. W. & Co. firm.) 

I don't remember what that technical phrase was, but 
I think you will find it in any Cyclopedia under the head 
of "Brass." The thing I best remember is, that the self- 
styled "inventor" had a very ingenious way of keeping 
me from seeing him apply his invention : the first appoint- 
ment was spoiled by his burning down the man's shop 
in which it was to be done, the night before; the second 
was spoiled by his burning down his own shop the night 
before. He unquestionably did both of these things. He 
really had no invention; the whole project was a black- 
mailing swindle, and cost me several thousand dollars. 

The slip you sent me from the May "Study" has 
delighted Mrs. Clemens and me to the marrow. To 
think that thing might be possible to many; but to be 
brave enough to say it is possible to you only, I certainly 
believe. The longer I live the clearer I perceive how un- 
matchable, how unapproachable, a compliment one pays 
when he says of a man "he has the courage (to utter) his 
convictions." Haven't you had reviewers talk Alps to 
you, and then print potato hills? 

I haven't as good an opinion of my work as you hold 
of it, but I've always done what I could to secure and 
enlarge my good opinion of it. I've always said to myself, 
"Everybody reads it and that's something — it surely 
isn't pernicious, or the most acceptable people would get 
pretty tired of it." And when a critic said by implication 
that it wasn't high and fine, through the remark "High 
and fine literature is wine " I retorted (confidentially, to 
myself,) "yes, high and fine literature is wine, and mine 
is only water; but everybody likes water." 

You didn't tell me to return that proof-slip, so I have 
pasted it into my private scrap-book. None will see it 
there. With a thousand thanks. 

Ys Ever 

Mark. 

485 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Our next letter is an unmatfed answer, but it does not 
belong with the others, having been withheld for reasons of 
quite a different sort. Jeanette Gilder, then of the Critic, was 
one of Mark Twain's valued friends. In the comment which he 
made, when it was shown to him twenty-two years later, he tells 
us why he thinks this letter was not sent. The name, "Rest- 
and-be-Thankful," was the official title given to the summer place 
at Elmira, but it was more often known as "Quarry Farm." 

To JeanneUe Gilder (not mailed): 

Hartford, May 14, '87. 
My dear Miss Gilder —We shall spend the summer 
at the same old place — the remote farm called "Rest-and- 
be-Thankful," on top of the hills three miles from Elmira, 
N. Y. Your other question is harder to answer. It is 
my habit to keep four or five books in process of erection 
all the time, and every summer add a few courses of 
bricks to two or three of them; but I cannot forecast which 
of the two or three it is going to be. It takes seven years 
to complete a book by this method, but still it is a good 
method : gives the public a rest. I have been accused of 
"rushing into print" prematurely, moved thereto by 
greediness for money; but in truth I have never done 
that. Do you care for trifles of information? (Well, 
then, "Tom Sawyer" and "The Prince and the Pauper" 
were each on the stocks two or three years, and "Old . 
Times on the Mississippi" eight. One of my unfinished 
books has been on the stocks sixteen years; another 
seventeen. This latter book could have been finished in 
a day, at any time during the past five years. But as in 
the first of these two narratives all the action takes place 
in Noah's ark, and as in the other the action takes place 
in heaven, there seemed to be no hurry, and so I have not 
hurried. Tales of stirring adventure in those localities 
do not need to be rushed to publication lest they get stale 
by waiting. In twenty-one years, with all my time at 
my free disposal I have written and completed only eleven 
books, whereas with half the labor that a journalist does 

486 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

I could have written sixty in that time. I do not greatly 
mind being accused of a proclivity for rushing into print, 
but at the same time I don't believe that the charge is 
really well founded. Suppose I did write eleven books, 
have you nothing to be grateful for? Go to—remember 
the forty-nine which I din't write. 

truly Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

Notes (added twenty-two years later): 

Stormfield, April 30, 1909. It seems the letter was not 
sent. I probably feared she might print it, and I couldn't 
find a way to say so without running a risk of hurting her. 
No one would hurt Jeannette Gilder purposely, and no 
one would want to run the risk of doing it unintentionally. 
She is my neighbor, six miles away, now, and I must ask 
her about this ancient letter. 

I note with pride and pleasure that I told no untruths 
in my unsent answer. I still have the habit of keeping 
unfinished books lying around years and years, waiting. 
I have four or five novels on hand at present in a half- 
finished condition, and it is more than three years since 
I have looked at any of them. I have no intention of 
finishing them. I could complete all of them in less than 
a year, if the impulse should come powerfully upon me. 
Long, long ago money-necessity furnished that impulse 
once, ("Following the Equator"), but mere desire for 
money has never furnished it, so far as I remember. Not 
even money-necessity was able to overcome me on a 
couple of occasions when perhaps I ought to have allowed 
it to succeed. While I was a bankrupt and in debt two 
offers were made me for weekly literary contributions to 
continue during a year, and they would have made, a 
debtless man of me, but I declined them, with my wife's 
full approval, for I had known of no instance where a man 
had pumped himself out once a week and failed to run 
"emptyings" before the year was finished. 

487 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

As to that "Noah's Ark" book, I began it in Edin- 
burgh in 1873 j 1 I don't know where the manuscript is 
now. It was a Diary, which professed to be the work of 
Shem, but wasn't. I began it again several months ago, 
but only for recreation; I hadn't any intention of carrying 
it to a finish — or even to the end of the first chapter, in fact. 

As to the book whose action "takes place in Heaven/" 
That was a small thing, ("Captain Stormfield's Visit to 
Heaven.") It lay in my pigeon-holes 40 years, then I 
took it out and printed it in Harper's Monthly last year. 

S. L. C 

In the next letter we get a pretty and peaceful picture of 
"Rest-and-be-Thankful." These were Mark Twain's balmy 
days. The financial drain of the type-machine was heavy but 
not yet exhausting, and the prospect of vast returns from it 
seemed to grow brighter each day. His publishing business, 
though less profitable, was still prosperous, his family life was 
ideal. How gratefully, then, he could enter into the peace of 
that "perfect day." 

To Mrs. Orion Clemens, in Keokuk, la.: 

On the hill near Elmira, July io t '87. 
Dear Mollie, — This is a superb Sunday for weather — 
very cloudy, and the thermometer as low as 65. The* 
city in the valley is purple with shade, as seen from up 
here at the study. The Cranes are reading and loafing 
in the canvas-curtained summer-house 50 yards away 
on a higher (the highest) point; the cats are loafing over 
at "Ellerslie" which is the children's estate and dwelling- 
house in their own private grounds (by deed from Susie 
Crane) a hundred yards from the study, amongst the 
clover and young oaks and willows. Livy is down at the 
house, but I shall now go and bring her up to the Cranes 
to help us occupy the lounges and hammocks — whence a 
great panorama of distant hill and valley and city is see- 

1 This is not quite correct. The "Noah's Ark " book was begun in 
Buffalo in 1870. 

488 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



able. The children have gone on a lark through the neigh- 
boring hills and woods. It is a perfect day indeed. 
With love to you all. Sam. 

Two days after this letter was written we get a hint of what 
was the beginning of business trouble — that is to say, of the 
failing health of Charles L. Webster. Webster was ambitious, 
nervous, and not robust. He had overworked and was paying 
the penalty. His trouble was neurasthenia, and he was pres- 
ently obliged to retire altogether from the business. The 
1 4 Sara and Mary" mentioned were Samuel Moffet and his wife. 

To Mrs. Pamela Moffeit, in Fredonia, N. Y. 

Elmira, July 12, '87. 

My dear Sister, — I had no idea that Charley's case 
was so serious. I knew it was bad, and persistent, but I 
was not aware of the full size of the matter. 

I have just been writing to a friend in Hartford who 
treated what I imagine was a similar case surgically last 
fall, and produced a permanent cure. If this is a like 
case, Charley must go to him. 

If relief fails there, he must take the required rest, 
whether the business can stand it or not. 

It is most pleasant to hear such prosperous accounts of 
Sam and Mary, I do not see how Sam could well be more 
advantageously fixed. He can grow up with that paper, 
and achieve a successful life. 

It is not all holiday here with Susie and Clara this time. 
They have to put in some little time every day on their 
studies. Jean thinks she is studying too, but I don't 
know what it is unless it is the horses; she spends the day 
under their heels in the stables — and that is but a con- 
tinuation of her Hartford system of culture. 

With love from us all to you all. 

Affectionately 

Sam. 

Mark Twain had a few books that he read regularly every 
year or two. Among these were Pepys's Diary, Suetonius 's 

489 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Lives of the Twelve Casars, and Thomas Carlyle's French Revo- 
lution. He had a passion for history, biography, and personal 
memoirs of any sort. In his early life he had cared very little 
for poetry, but along in the middle eighties he somehow acquired 
a taste for Browning and became absorbed in it. A Browning 
club assembed as often as once a week at the Clemens home in 
Hartford to listen to his readings of the master. He was an 
impressive reader, and he carefully prepared himself for these 
occasions, indicating by graduated undersco rings the exact 
values he wished to give to words and phrases. Those were 
memorable gatherings, and they must have continued through 
at least two winters. It is one of the puzzling phases of Mark 
Twain's character that, notwithstanding his passion for direct 
and lucid expression, he should have found pleasure in the poems 
of Robert Browning. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Elm ira, Am. 22, '87. 

My dear Howells, — How stunning are the changes 
which age makes in a man while he sleeps. When I fin- 
ished Carlyle's French Revolution in 1871, I was a 
Girondin; every time I have read it since, I have read 
it differently— being influenced and changed, little by 
little, by life and environment (and Taine and St. Simon) : 
and now I lay the book down once more, and recognize 
that I am a Sansculotte! — And not a pale, characterless 
Sansculotte, but a Marat. Carlyle teaches no such gospel : 
so the change is in me — in my vision of the evidences. 

People pretend that the Bible means the same to them 
at 50 that it did at all former milestones in their journey. 
I wonder how they can lie so. It comes of practice, no 
doubt. They would not say that of Dickens's or Scott's 
books. Nothing remains the same. When a man goes 
back to look at the house of his childhood, it has always 
shrunk: there is no instance of such a house being as big 
as the picture in memory' and imagination call for. Shrunk 
how? Why, to its correct dimensions: the house hasn't 
altered ; this is the first time it has been in focus. 

Well, that's loss. To have house and Bible shrink so, 

490 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

tinder the disillusioning corrected angle, is loss — for a 
moment. But there are compensations. You tilt the 
tube skyward and bring planets and comets and corona 
flames a hundred and fifty thousand miles high into the 
field. Which I see you have done, and found Tolstoi. I 
haven't got him in focus yet, but I've got Browning. . . . 

Ys Ever 

Mark. 

Mention has been made already of, Mark Twain's tendency 
to absent-mindedness. He was always forgetting engagements, 
or getting them wrong. Once he hurried to an afternoon party, 
and finding the mistress of the house alone, sat down and 
talked to her comfortably for an hour or two, not remembering 
his errand at all. It was only when he reached home that he 
learned that the party had taken place the week before. It 
was always dangerous for him to make engagements, and he 
never seemed to profit by sorrowful experience. We, however, 
may profit now by one of his amusing apologies. 

To Mrs. Graver Cleveland, in Washington: 

Hartford, Nov. 6, 1887. 

My dear Madam, — I do not know how it is in the 
White House, but in this house of ours whenever the 
minor half of the administration tries to run itself without 
the help of the major half it gets aground. Last night 
when I was offered the opportunity to assist you in the 
throwing open the Warner brothers superb benefaction 
in Bridgeport to those fortunate women, I naturally 
appreciated the honor done me, and p romptl y seized my 
chance. I had an engagement, but the circumstances 
washed it out of my mind. If I had only laid the matter 
before the major half of the administration on the spot, 
there would have been no blunder; but I never thought 
of that. So when I did lay it before her, later, I realized 
once more that it will not do for the literary fraction of a 
combination to try to manage affairs which properly 
belong in the office of the business bulk of it. I suppose 

491 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the President often acts just like that: goes and makes an 
impossible promise, and you never find it out until it is 
next to impossible to break it up and set things straight 
again. Well, that is just our way, exactly — one half of 
the administration always busy getting the family into 
trouble, and the other half busy getting it out again. 
And so we do seem to be all pretty much alike, after all. 
The fact is, I had forgotten that we were to have a dinner 
party on that Bridgeport date — I thought it was the next 
day: which is a good deal of an improvement for me, be- 
cause I am more used to being behind a day or two than 
ahead. But that is just the difference between one end 
of this kind of an administration and the other end of it, 
as you have noticed, yourself — the other end does not 
forget these things. Just so with a funeral; if it is the 
man's funeral, he is most always there, of course — but 
that is no credit to him, he wouldn't be there if you 
depended on him to remember about it; whereas, if on 
the other hand — but I seem to have got off from my line 
of argument somehow; never mind about the funeral. Of 
course I am not meaning to say anything against funerals 
— that is, as occasions — mere occasions — for as diversions 
I don't think they amount to much But as I was saying 
— if you are not busy I will look back and see what it was 
I was saying. 

I don't seem to find the place; but anyway she was as 
sorry as ever anybody could be that I could not go to 
Bridgeport, but there was no help for it. And I, I have 
been not only sorry but very sincerely ashamed of having 
made an engagement to go without first making sure that 
I could keep it, and I do not know how to apologize enough 
for my heedless breach of good manners. 

With the sincerest respect, 

S. L. Clemens 

Samuel Clemens was one of the very few authors to copyright 
a book in England before the enactment of the international 
copyright law. As early as 1872 he copyrighted Roughing It in 

492 



Digitized by Google 



» 

MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



England, and piratical publishers there respected his rights. 
Finally, in 1887, the inland revenue office assessed him with 
income tax, which he very willingly paid, instructing his London 
publishers, Chatto & Windus, to pay on the full amount he had 
received from them. But when the receipt for his taxes came it 
was nearly a yard square with due postage of considerable 
amount. Then he wrote: 

To Mr. Chatto, of Chatto & Windus, in London: 

Hartford, Dec. 5, '87. 

My dear Chatto —Look here, I don't mind paying 
the tax. but don't you let the Inland Revenue Office send 
me any more receipts for it, for the postage is something 
perfectly demoralizing. If they feel obliged to print a 
receipt on a horse-blanket, why don't they hire a ship and 
send it over at their own expense ? 

Wasn't it good that they caught me out with an old 
book instead of a new one? The tax on a new book would 
bankrupt a body. It was my purpose to go to England 
next May and stay the rest of the year, but I've found that 
tax office out just in time. My new book would issue in 
March, and they would tax the sale in both countries. 
Come, we must get up a compromise somehow. You go 
and work in on the good side of those revenue people and 
get them to take the profits and give me the tax. Then I 
will come over and we will divide the swag and have a 
good time. 

I wish you to thank Mr. Christmas for me; but we 
won't resist. The country that allows me copyright has 
a right to tax me. Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

Another English tax assessment came that year, based on 
the report that it was understood that he was going to become 
an English resident, and had leased Buckenham Hall, Norwich, 
for a year. Clemens wrote his publishers: "I will explain 
that all that about Buckenham Hall was an English newspaper's 
mistake. I was not in England, and if I had been I wouldn't 
ii.-i 493 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



have been at Buckenham Hall, anyway, but at Buckingham 
Palace, or I would have endeavored to find out the reason why. 
Clemens made literature out of this tax experience. He wrote 
an open letter to Her Majesty Queen Victoria. Such a letter 
has no place in this collection. It was published in the " Drawer " 
of Harper's Magazine , December, 1887, and is now included in 
the uniform edition of his works under the title of, "A Petition 
to the Queen of England." 

From the following letter, written at the end of the year, we 
gather that the type-setter costs were beginning to make a 
difference in the Clemens economies. 

To Mrs. Mofiett, in Fredonia: 

Hartford, Dec. 18 , '87. 

Dear Pamela, — Will you take this $15 and buy some 
candy or some other trifle for yourself and Sam and his 
wife to remember that we remember you, by? 

If we weren't a little crowded this year by the type- 
setter, I'd send a check large enough to buy a family Bible 
or some other useful thing like that. However we go on 
and on, but the type-setter goes on forever — at $3,000 a 
month; which is much more satisfactory than was the 
case the first seventeen months, when the bill only aver- 
aged $2,000, and promised to take a thousand years. 
We'll be through, now, in 3 or 4 months, I reckon, and 
then the strain will let up and we can breathe freely once 
more, whether success ensues or failure. 

Even with a type-setter on hand we ought not to be in 
the least scrimped — but it would take a long letter to 
explain why and who is to blame. 

All the family send love to all of you and best Christ- 
mas wishes for your prosperity. 

Affectionately, 

Sam. 



Digitized by Google 



XXVIII 



LETTERS, 1888. A YALE DEGREE. WORK ON 11 THE 
YANKEE." ON INTERVIEWING, ETC. 

MARK TWAIN received his first college degree when he 
was made Master of Arts by Yale, in June, 1888. Edi- 
tor of the Courant, Charles H. Clarke, was selected to notify 
him of his new title. Clarke was an old friend to whom Clem- 
ens could write familiarly. 

To Charles H. Clarke, in Hartford: 

Elmira, July 2 % '88. 
My dear Charles,— Thanks for your thanks, and for 
your initiation intentions. I shall be ready for you. I 
feel mighty proud of that degree; in fact, I could squeeze 
the truth a little closer and say vain of it. And why 
shouldn't I be? — I am the only literary animal of my 
particular subspecies who has ever been given a degree 
by any College in any age of the world, as far as I know. 

Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemens M A. 

Reply: Charles H. Clarke to S. L Clemens: 

My dear Friend, — You are "the only literary animal 
of your particular subspecies" in existence and you've 
no cause for humility in the fact. Yale has done herself 
at least as much credit as she has done you, and " Don't 
you forget it." C. H. C. 

With the exception of his brief return to the river in 1882. 
Mark Twain had been twenty-seven years away from pilots 

495 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

and piloting. Nevertheless, he always kept a tender place in 
his heart for the old times and for old river comrades. Major 
"Jack" Downing had been a Mississippi pilot of early days, 
but had long since retired from the river to a comfortable life 
ashore, in an Ohio town. Clemens had not heard from him for 
years when a letter came which invited the following answer. 

To Major "Jack" Downing, in Middleport Ohio: 

Elmira, N. Y. 

[no monthl 188S. 

Dear Major, — And has it come to this that the dead 
rise up and speak? For I supposed that you were dead, 
it has been so long since I heard your name. 

And how young you've grown ! I was a mere boy when 
I knew you on the river, where you had been piloting for 
35 years, and now you are only a year and a half older 
than I am! I mean to go to Hot Springs myself and get 
30 or 40 years knocked off my age. It's manifestly the 
place that Ponce de Leon was striking for, but the poor 
fellow lost the trail. 

Possibly I may see you, for I shall be in St. Louis a day 
or two in November. I propose to go down the river and 
"note the changes" once more before I make the long 
crossing, and perhaps you can come there. Will you? I 
want to see all the boys that are left alive. 

And so Grant Marsh, too, is flourishing yet? A mighty 
good fellow, and smart too. When we were taking that 
wood flat down to the Chambers, which was aground, I 
soon saw that I was a perfect lubber at piloting such a 
thing. I saw that I could never hit the Chambers with 
it, so I resigned in Marsh's favor, and he accomplished 
the task to my admiration. We should all have gone to 
the mischief if I had remained in authority. I always had 
good judgement, more judgement than talent, in fact. 

No; the nom de plume did not originate in that way. 
Capt. Sellers used the signature, "Mark Twain," himself, 
when he used to write up the antiquities in the way of 
river reminiscences for the New Orleans Picayune. He 

496 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



hated me for burlesqueing them in an article in the True 
Delta; so four years later when he died, I robbed the 
corpse — that is I confiscated the nom de plume. I have 
published this vital fact 3,000 times now. But no matter, 
it is good practice; it is about the only fact that I can tell 
the same way every time. Very glad, indeed, to hear 
from you Major, and shall be gladder still to see you in 
November. 

Truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

He did not make the journey down the river planned for that 
year. He had always hoped to make another steamboat trip 
with Bixby, but one thing and another interfered and he did 
not go again. 

Authors were always sending their books to Mark Twain to 
read, and no busy man was ever more kindly disposed toward 
such offerings, more generously considerate of the senders. 
Louis Pendleton was a young unknown writer in 1888, but 
Clemens took time to read his story carefully, and to write 
to him about it a letter that cost precious time, thought, and 
effort. It must have rejoiced the young man's heart to receive 
a letter like that, from one whom all young authors held supreme. 

To Louis Pendleton, in Georgia: 

Elmira, N. Y. f Aug. 4, '88. 

My dear Sir,— -I found your letter an hour ago among 
some others which had lain forgotten a couple of weeks, 
and I at once stole time enough to read Ariadne. Stole 
is the right word, for the summer 44 Vacation" is the only 
chance I get for work; so, no minute subtracted from 
work is borrowed, it is stolen. But this time I do not 
repent. As a rule, people don't send me books which I 
can thank them for, and so I say nothing — which looks 
un courteous. But I thank you. Ariadne is a beautiful 
and satisfying story; and true, too — which is the best 
part of a story; or indeed of any other thing. Even liars 
have to admit that, if they are intelligent liars; I mean 

497 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

in their private [the word conscientious written but erased) ' 
intervals. (I struck that word out because a man's 
private thought can never be a lie; what he thinks, is to 
him the truth, always; what he speaks — but these be 
platitudes.) 

If you want me to pick some flaws — very well — but I 
do it unwillingly. I notice one thing — which one may 
notice also in my books, and in all books whether written 
by man or God: trifling carelessness of statement or 
Expression. If I think that you meant that she took 
the lizard from the water which she had drawn from the 
well, it is evidence — it is almost proof — that your words 
were not as clear as they should have been. True, it is 
only a trifling thing; but so is mist on a mirror. I would 
have hung the pail on Ariadne's arm. You did not deceive 
me when you said that she carried it under her arm, for I 
knew she didn't; still it was not your right to mar my 
enjoyment of the graceful picture. If the pail had been 
a portfolio, I wouldn't be making these remarks. The 
engraver of a fine picture revises, and revises, and revises 
— and then revises, and revises, and revises; and then 
repeats. And always the charm of that picture grows, 
under his hand. It was good enough before — told its 
story, and was beautiful. True: and a lovely girl is 
lovely, with freckles; but she isn't at her level best with 
them. 

This is not hypercriticism; you have had training 
enough to know that. 

So much concerning exactness of statement. In that 
other not-small matter — selection of the exact single word 
—you are hard to catch. Still, I should hold that Mrs. 
Walker considered that there was no occsaion for con- 
cealment; that "motive" implied a deeper mental search 
than she expended on the matter; that it doesn't reflect 
the attitude of her mind with precision. Is this hyper- 
criticism? I shan't dispute it. I only say, that if Mrs. 
Walker didn't go so far as to have a motive, I had; to 
suggest that when a word is so near the right one that a 

498 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



txxiy can't quite tell whether it is or isn't, it's good 
politics to strike it out and go for the Thesaurus. That's 
all. Motive may stand; but you have allowed a snake 
to scream, and I will not concede that that was the best 
word. 

I do not apologize for saying these things, for they 
are not said in the speck-hunting spirit, but in the spirit 
of want-to-help-if-I-can. They would be useful to me if 
said to me once a month, they may be useful to you, said 
once. 

I save the other stories for my real vacation — which is 
nine months long, to my sorrow. I thank you again. 

Truly Yours 

S. L Clemens. 

In the next letter we get a sidelight on the type-setting 
machine, the Frankenstein monster that was draining their 
substance and holding out false hopes of relief and golden return. 
The program here outlined was one that would continue for 
several years yet, with the end always in sight, but never quite 
attained. 

To Orion Clemens, in Keokuk, la.: 

Private 0cL 3' ' 88 - 

. . . Saturday 29th, by a closely calculated estimate, 
there were 85 days' work to do on the machine. 

We can use 4 men, but not constantly. If they could 
work constantly it would complete the machine in 21 
days, of course. They will all be on hand and under 
wages, and each will get in all the work there is oppor- 
tunity for, but by how much they can reduce the 85 days 
toward the 21 days, nobody can tell. 

To-day I pay Pratt & Whitney $10,000. This squares 
back indebtedness and everything to date. They began 
about May or April or March 1886 — along there some- 
where, and have always kept from a dozen to two dozen 
master-hands on the machine. 

That outgo is done; 4 men for a month or two will 

499 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



close up that leak and caulk it. Work on the patents is 
also kind of drawing toward a conclusion. 

Love to you both. All well here. 

And give our love to Ma if she can get the idea. 

Sam. 

Mark Twain that year was working pretty steadily on The 
Yankee at King Arthur's Court, a book which he had begun two 
years before. He had published nothing since the Buck Finn 
story, and his company was badly in need of a new book by an 
author of distinction. Also it was highly desirable to earn 
money for himself; wherefore he set to work to finish the Yankee 
story. He had worked pretty steadily that summer in his 
Elmira study, but on his return to Hartford found a good deal 
of confusion in the house, so went over to Twichell's, where 
carpenter work was in progress. He seems to have worked there 
successfully, though what improvement of conditions he found 
in that numerous, lively household, over those at home it would 
be difficult to say. 

To Theodore W. Crane, at Quarry Farm, Elmira, N. Y. 

Friday, Oct, 5, '88. 

Dear Theo,— - 1 am here in Twichell's house at work, 
with the noise of the children and an army of carpenters 
to help. Of course they don't help, but neither do they 
hinder. It's like a boiler-factory for racket, and in nailing 
a wooden ceiling onto the room under me the hammering 
tickles my feet amazingly sometimes, and jars my table 
a good deal; but I never am conscious of the racket at all. 
and I move my feet into position of relief without know- 
ing when I do it. I began here Monday morning, and have 
done eighty pages since. I was so tired last night that I 
thought I would lie abed and rest, to-day; but I couldn't 
resist. I mean to try to knock off to-morrow, but it's 
doubtful if I do. I want to finish the day the machine 
finishes, and a week ago the closest calculations for that 
indicated Oct. 22 — but experience teaches me that their 
calculations will miss fire, as usual. 

The other day the children were projecting a purchase, 

500 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Livy and I to furnish the money — a dollar and a half. 
Jean discouraged the idea. She said: "We haven't got 
any money. Children, if you would think, you would 
remember the machine isn't done. 

It's billiards to-night. I wish you were here. 

With love to you both— S. L. C. 

P. S. I got it all wrong. It wasn't the children, it was 
Marie. She wanted a box of blacking, for the children's 
shoes. Jean reproved her — and said: 

14 Why, Marie, you mustn t ask for things now. The 
machine isn't done. S. L. C. 

The letter that follows is to another of his old pilot friends, 
one who was also a schoolmate, Will Bowen, of Hannibal. 
There is to-day no means of knowing the occasion upon which 
this letter was written, but it does not matter; it is the letter 
itself that is of chief value. 

To Will Bowen, in Hannibal, Mo.: 

Hartford, Nov. 4, '88. 
Dear Will, — I received your letter yesterday evening, 
just as I was starting out of town to attend a wedding, 
and so my mind was privately busy, all the evening, in 
the midst of the maelstrom of chat and chaff and laughter, 
with the sort of reflections which create themselves, 
examine themselves, and continue themselves, unaffected 
by surroundings — unaffected, that is understood, by the 
surroundings, but not uninfluenced by them. Here was 
the near presence of the two supreme events of life: 
marriage, which is the beginning of life, and death which 
is the end of it. I found myself seeking chances to shirk 
into corners where I might think, undisturbed; and the 
most I got out of my thought, was this: both marriage 
and death ought to be welcome : the one promises happi- 
ness, doubtless the other assures it. A long procession 
of people filed through my mind — people whom you and 
I knew so many years ago — so many centuries ago, it 

501 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



seems like — and these ancient dead marched to the soft 
marriage music of a band concealed in some remote room 
of the house; and the contented music and the dreaming 
shades seemed in right accord with each other, and fitting. 
Nobody else knew that a procession of the dead was pass- 
ing through this noisy swarm of the living, but there it 
was, and to me there was nothing uncanny about it; no, 
they were welcome faces to me. I would have liked to 
bring up every creature we knew in those days — even the 
dumb animals — it would be bathing in the fabled Fountain 
of Youth. 

We all feel your deep trouble with you; and we would 
hope, if we might, but your words deny us that privilege. 
To die one's self is a thing that must be easy, and of light 
consequence, but to lose a part of one s self — well, we know 
how deep that pang goes, we who have suffered that 
disaster, received that wound which cannot heal. 

Sincerely your friend 

S. L. Clemens. 

His next is of quite a different nature. Evidently the type- 
setting conditions had alarmed Orion, and he was undertaking 
some economies with a view of retrenchment. Orion was always 
reducing economy to science. Once, at an earlier date, he re- 
corded that he had figured his personal living expenses down to 
sixty cents a week, but inasmuch as he was then, by his own con- 
fession, unable to earn the sixty cents, this particular economy 
was wasted. Orion was a trial, certainly, and the explosion 
that follows was not without excuse. Furthermore, it was not 
as bad as it sounds. Mark Twain's rages always had an element 
of humor in them, a fact which no one more than Orion himself 
would appreciate. He preserved this letter, quietly noting on 
the envelope, "Letter from Sam, about ma's nurse." 

Letter to Orion Clemens, in Keokuk, Iowa: 

Nov. 29, '88. 

Jesus Christ!— It is perilous to write such a man. You 
can go crazy on less material than anybody that ever 

502 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



lived. What in hell has produced all these maniacal 
imaginings? You told me you had hired an attendant for 
ma. Now hire one instantly, and stop this nonsense of 
wearing Mollie and yourself out trying to do that 
nursing yourselves. Hire the attendant, and tell me her 
cost so that I can instruct Webster & Co. to add it every 
month to what they already send. Don't fool away any 
more time about this. And don't write me any more 
damned rot about "storms," and inability to pay trivial 
sums of money and — and — hell and damnation! You see 
I've read only the first page of your letter; I wouldn't read 
the rest for a million dollars. 

Yr Sam. 

P. S. Don't imagine that I have lost my temper, be- 
cause I swear. I swear all day, but I do not lose my tem- 
per. And don't imagine that I am on my way to the poor- 
house, for I am not ; or that I am uneasy, for I am not ; 
or that I am uncomfortable or unhappy — for I never am. 
I don't know what it is to be unhappy or uneasy; and I 
am not going to try to learn how, at this late day. 

Sam. 

Few men were ever interviewed oftener than Mark Twain, 
yet he never welcomed interviewers and was seldom satisfied 
with them. "What I say in an interview loses it character in 
print," he often remarked, "all its life and personality. The 
reporter realizes this himself, and tries to improve upon me, but 
he doesn't help matters any." 

Edward W. Bok, before he became editor of the Ladies Home 
Journal, was conducting a weekly syndicate column under the 
title of "Bok's Literary Leaves." It usually consisted of news 
and gossip of writers, comment, etc., literary odds and ends, 
and occasional interviews with distinguished authors. He went 
up to Hartford one day to interview Mark Twain. The result 
seemed satisfactory to Bok, but wishing to be certain that it 
would be satisfactory to Clemens, he sent him a copy for 
approval. The interview was not returned; in the place of it 
came a letter—not altogether disappointing, as the reader may 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To Edward W. Bok, in New York: 

My Dear Mr. Bok, — No, no. It is like most inter- 
views, pure twaddle and valueless. 

For several quite plain and simple reasons, an "inter- 
view" must, as a rule, be an absurdity, and chiefly for this 
reason — It is an attempt to use a boat on land or a wagon 
on water, to speak figuratively. Spoken speech is one 
thing, written speech is quite another. Print is the proper 
vehicle for the latter, but it isn't for the former. The 
moment "talk" is put into print you recognize that it is 
not what it was when you heard it ; you perceive that an 
immense something has disappeared from it. That is its 
soul. You have nothing but a dead carcass left on your 
hands. Color, play of feature, the varying modulations 
of the voice, the laugh, the smile, the informing inflections, 
everything that gave that body warmth, grace, friendli- 
ness and charm and commended it to your affections — or, 
at least, to your tolerance — is gone and nothing is left but 
a pallid, stiff and repulsive cadaver. 

Such is "talk" almost invariably, as you see it lying in 
state in an "interview". The interviewer seldom tries to 
tell one how a thing was said; he merely puts in the naked 
remark and stops there. When one writes for print his 
methods are very different. He follows forms which have 
but little resemblance to conversation, but they make the 
reader understand what the writer is trying to convey. 
And when the writer is making a story and finds it neces- 
sary to report some of the talk of his characters observe 
how cautiously and anxiously he goes at that risky and 
difficult thing. " If he had dared to say that thing in my 
presence," said Alfred, "taking a mock heroic attitude, 
and casting an arch glance upon the company, blood 
would have flowed. 

"If he had dared to say that thing in my presence," 
said Hawkwood, with that in his eye which caused more 
than one heart in that guilty assemblage to quake, " blood 
would have flowed." 

504 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



" If he had dared to say that thing in my presence," said 
the paltry blusterer, with valor on his tongue and pallor 
on his lips, "blood would have flowed." 

So painfully aware is the novelist that naked talk in 
print conveys no meaning that he loads, and often over- 
loads, almost every utterance of his characters with ex- 
planations and interpretations. It is a loud confession 
that print is a poor vehicle for "talk"; it is a recognition 
that uninterpreted talk in print would result in confusion 
to the reader, not instruction. 

Now, in your interview, you have certainly been most 
accurate; you have set down the sentences I uttered as I 
said them. But you have not a word of explanation; 
what my manner was at several points is not indicated 
Therefore, no reader can possibly know where I was in 
earnest and where I was joking; or whether I was joking 
altogether or in earnest altogether. Such a report of a 
conversation has no value. It can convey many mean- 
ings to the reader, but never the right one. To add inter- 
pretations which would convey the right meaning is a 
something which would require — what? An art so high 
and fine and difficult that no possessor of it would ever 
be allowed to waste it on interviews. 

No; spare the reader and spare me; leave the whole 
interview out; it is rubbish. I wouldn't talk in my sleep 
if I couldn't talk better than that. 

If you wish to print anything print this letter; it may 
have some value, for it may explain to a reader here and 
there why it is that in interviews, as a rule, men seem to 
talk like anybody but themselves. 

Very sincerely yours, 

Mark Twain. 



Digitized by Google 



XXIX 



LETTERS, 1889. THE MACHINE. DEATH OP MR. CRANE. 

CONCLUSION OF THE YANKEE 

IN January, 1889, Clemens believed, after his long seven years 
of waiting, fruition had come in the matter of the type 
machine. Paige, the inventor, seemed at last to have given it 
its finishing touches. The mechanical marvel that had cost so 
much time, mental stress, and a fortune in money, stood com- 
plete, responsive to the human will and touch — the latest, and 
one of the greatest, wonders of the world. To George Standring, 
a London printer and publisher, Clemens wrote: "The machine 
is finished!" and added, "This is by far the most marvelous 
invention ever contrived by man. And it is not a thing of 
rags and patches; it is made of massive steel, and will last a 
century. 

In his fever of enthusiasm on that day when he had actually 
seen it in operation, he wrote a number of exuberant letters. 
They were more or less duplicates, but as the one to his brother 
is of fuller detail and more intimate than the others, it has been 
selected for preservation here. 

To Orion Clemens, in Keokuk: 

Hartford, Jan. 5, *8g. 
Dear Orion, — At 12.20 this afternoon a line of movable 
types was spaced and justified by machinery, for the first 
time in the history of the world ! And I was there to see. 
It was done autgptatically — instantly — perfectly. This is 
indeed the first line of movable types that ever was per- 
fectly spaced and perfectly justified on this earth. 
This was the last function that remained to be tested — 

506 

\ 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and so by long odds the most amazing and extraordinary 
invention ever born of the brain of man stands completed 
and perfect. Livy is down stairs celebrating. 

But it's a cunning devil, is that machine! — and knows 
more than any man that ever lived. You shall see. We 
made the test in this way. We set up a lot of random 
letters in a stick— three-fourths of a line; then filled out 
the line with quads representing 14 spaces, each space to 
be 35-1000 of an inch thick. Then we threw aside the 
quads and put the letters into the machine and formed 
them into 1 5 two-letter words, leaving the words separated 
by two-inch vacancies. Then we started up the machine 
slowly, by hand, and fastened our eyes on the space- 
selecting pins. The first pin-block projected its third pin 
as the first word came traveling along the race-way; 
second block did the same; but the third block projected 
its second pin ! 

"Oh, hell! stop the machine — something wrong — it's 
going to set a 30-1000 space!" 

General consternation. "A foreign substance has got 
into the spacing plates." This from the head mathema- 
tician. 

"Yes, that is the trouble," assented the foreman. 

Paige examined. "No — look in, and you can see that 
there's nothing of the kind." Further examination. "Now 
I know what it is— what it must be: one of those plates 
projects and binds. It's too bad — the first test is a failure." 
A pause. "Well, boys, no use to cry. Get to work — take 
the machine down. — No — Hold on! don't touch a thing! 
Go right ahead! We are fools, the machine isn't. The 
machine knows what it's about. There is a speck of dirt 
on one of those types, and the machine is putting in a y 
thinner space to allow for it!" 

That was just it. The machine went right ahead, 
spaced the line, justified it to a hair, and shoved it into 
the galley complete and perfect! We took it out and 
examined it with a glass. You could not tell by your eye 
that the third space was thinner than the others, but the 

507 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



glass and the calipers showed the difference. Paige had 
always said that the machine would measure invisible 
particles of dirt and allow for them, but even he had for- 
gotten that vast fact for the moment. 

All the witnesses made written record of the immense 
historical birth — the first justification of a line of mov- 
able type by machinery — and also set down the hour 
and the minute. Nobody had drank anything, and 
yet everybody seemed drunk. Well— dizzy, stupefied, 
stunned. 

All the other wonderful inventions of the human brain 
sink pretty nearly into commonplace contrasted with 
this awful mechanical miracle. Telephones, telegraphs, 
locomotives, cotton gins, sewing machines, Babbage cal- 
culators, Jacquard looms, perfecting presses, Arkwrigbt's 
frames— all mere toys, simplicities! The Paige Com- 
positor marches alone and far in the lead of human in- 
ventions. 

In two or three weeks we shall work the stiffness out of 
her joints and have her performing as smoothly and 
softly as human muscles, and then we shall speak out the 
big secret and let the world come and gaze. 

Return me this letter when you have read it. Sam 

Judge of the elation which such a letter would produce in 
Keokuk! Yet it was no greater than that which existed in 
Hartford — for a time. 

Then further delays. Before the machine got "the stiffness 
out of her joints" that "cunning devil" manifested a tendency 
to break the types, and Paige, who was never happier than when 
he was pulling things to pieces and making improvements, had 
the type-setter apart again and the day of complete triumph 
was postponed. 

There was sadness at the Elmira farm that spring. Theodore 
Crane, who had long been in poor health, seemed to grow daily 
worse. In February he had paid a visit to Hartford and saw 
the machine in operation, but by the end of May his condition 
was very serious. Remembering his keen sense of humor, 
Clemens reported to him cheering and MMtfiiig incidents. 

SOS 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAINS LETTERS 



To Mrs. Theodore Crane, in Elmira, N. Y.: 

Hartford, May 28, *8g. 

Susie dear, I want you to tell this to Theodore. You 
know how absent-minded Twichell is, and how desolate 
his face is when he is in that frame. At such times, 
he passes the word with a friend on the street and is not 
aware of the meeting at all. Twice in a week, our Clara 
had this latter experience with him within the past 
month. But the second instance was too much for her, 
and she woke him up, in his tracks, with a reproach. She 
said: — 

M Uncle Joe, why do you always look as if you were just 
going down into the grave, when you meet a person on the 
street?" — and then went on to reveal to him the funereal 
spectacle which he presented on such occasions. Well, 
she has met Twichell three times since then, and would 
swim the Connecticut to avoid meeting him the fourth. 
As soon as he sights her, no matter how public the place 
nor how far off she is, he makes a bound into the air, 
heaves arms and legs into all sorts of frantic gestures of 
delight, and so comes prancing, skipping and pirouetting 
for her like a drunken Indian entering heaven. 

With a full invoice of love from us all to you and 
Theodore. 

S. L. C. 

The reference in the next to the "closing sentence" in a letter 
written by Howells to Clemens about this time, refers to a 
heart-broken utterance of the former concerning his daughter 
Winnie, who had died some time before. She had been a gentle 
talented girl, but never of robust health . Her death had followed 
a long period of gradual decline. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, July ij, *8o. 
Dear Howells, — I came on from Elmira a day or 
two ago, where I left a house of mourning. Mr. Crane 
tb-4 509 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

died, after ten months of pain and two whole days of 
dying, at the farm on the hill, the 3rd inst: A man who 
had always hoped for a swift death. Mrs. Crane and 
Mrs. Clemens and the children were in a gloom which 
brought back to me the days of nineteen years ago, when 
Mr. Langdon died. It is heart-breaking to see Mrs. 
Crane. Many a time, in the past ten days, the sight of 
her has reminded me, with a pang, of the desolation 
which uttered itself in the closing sentence of your last 
letter to me. I do see that there is an argument against 
suicide: the grief of the worshipers left behind, the awful 
famine in their hearts, these are too costly terms for the 
release. 

I shall be here ten days yet, and all alone: nobody 
in the house but the servants. Can't Mrs. Howells 
spare you to me? Can't you come and stay with 
me? The house is cool and pleasant; your work will 
not be interrupted; we will keep to ourselves and let 
the rest of the world do the same; you can have 
your choice of three bedrooms, and you will find the 
Children's schoolroom (which was built for my study.) 
the prefection of a retired and silent den for work. There 
isn't a fly or a mosquito on the estate. Come — say you 
will. 

With kindest regards to Mrs. Howells, and Pilla and 
John, 

Yours Ever 

Mark. 

Howells was more hopeful. He wrote: "I read some- 
thing in a strange book, The Physical Theory of Another 
Life, that consoles a little; namely, we see and feel the 
power of Deity in such fullness that we ought to infer the 
infinite Justice and Goodness which we do not see or feel/' 
And a few days later, he wrote: "I would rather see and 
talk with you than any other man in the world outside my 
own blood.*' 

A Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur's Court was brought to 
an end that year and given to the artist and printer. Dan 

510 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Beard was selected for the drawings, and was given a free hand, 
as the next letter shows. 

To Fred J. Hall, Manager Charles L. Webster & Co.: 1 

Elmira, July 24, '89. 

Dear Mr. HALL,—Upon reflection — thus: tell Beard 
to obey his own inspiration, and when he sees a picture 
in his mind put that picture on paper, be it humorous or 
be it serious. I want his genius to be wholly unhampered, 
I shan't have fears as to the result. They will be better 
pictures than if I mixed in and tried to give him points on 
his own trade. 

Send this note and he'll understand. 

Yr— S. L. C. 

Clemens had made a good choice in selecting Beard for the 
illustrations. He was well qualified for the work, and being of a 
socialistic turn of mind put his whole soul into it. When the 
drawings were completed, Clemens wrote: "Hold me under 
permanent obligations. What luck it was to find you! There 
are hundreds of artists that could illustrate any other book of 
mine, but there was only one who could illustrate this one. 
Yes, it was a fortunate hour that I went netting for lightning 
bugs and caught a meteor. Live forever!" 

Clemens, of course, was anxious for Howells to read The 
Yankee, and Mrs. Clemens particularly so. Her eyes were 
giving her trouble that summer, so that she could not read the 
MS. for herself, and she had grave doubts as to some of its 
chapters. It may be said here that the book to-day might have 
been better if Mrs. Clemens had been able to read it. Howells 
was a peerless critic, but the revolutionary subject-matter of 
the book so delighted him that he was perhaps somewhat blinded 
to its literary defects. However, this is premature. Howells 
did not at once see the story. He had promised to come to 
Hartford, but wrote that trivial matters had made his visit im- 
possible. From the next letter we get the situation at this time. 
The "Mr. Church" mentioned was Frederick S. Church, the 
well-known artist. 

1 Charles L. Webster, owing to poor health, had by this time re- 
tired from the firm. 

5» 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 



July 24, '8o. 

Dear Howells, — I, too, was as sorry as I could be; 
yes, and desperately disappointed. I even did a heroic 
thing: shipped my book off to New York lest I should 
forget hospitality and embitter your visit with it. Not 
that I think you wouldn't like to read it, for I think you 
would; but not on a holiday — that's not the time. I see 
how you were situated — another familiarity of Providence 
and wholly wanton intrusion — and of course we could not 
help ourselves. Well, just think of it: a while ago, while 
Providence's attention was absorbed in disordering some 
time-tables so as to break up a trip of mine to Mr. Church's 
on the Hudson, that Johnstown dam got loose. I swear 
I was afraid to pray, for fear I should laugh. 

Well, I'm not going to despair; we'll manage a meet 
yet. 

I expect to go to Hartford again in August and maybe 
remain till I have to come back here and fetch the family. 
And, along there in August, some time, you let on that 
you are going to Mexico, and I will let on that I am going 
to Spitzbergen, and then under cover of this clever strat- 
agem we will glide from the trains at Worcester and have 
a time. I have noticed that Providence is indifferent 
about Mexico and Spitzbergen. 

Ys Ever Mark. 

Possibly Mark Twain was not particularly anxious that 
Howells should see his MS., fearing that he might lay a ruthless 
hand on some of his more violent fulminations and wild fancies. 
However this may be, further postponement was soon at an end. 
Mrs. Clemens's eyes troubled her and would not permit her to 
read, so she requested that the Yankee be passed upon by sober- 
minded critics, such as Howells and Edmund Clarence Stedman. 
Howells wrote that even if he hadn't wanted to read the book 
for its own sake, or for the author's sake, he would still want to do 
it for Mrs. Clemens's. Whereupon the proofs were started in 
his direction. 

512 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Elmira, Aug. 24, '89. 

Dear Howells, — If you should be moved to speak of 
my book in the Study, I shall be glad and proud— and 
the sooner it gets in, the better for the book; though I 
don't suppose you can get it in earlier than the November 
number — why, no, you can't get it in till a month later 
than that. Well, anyway I don't think I'll send out any 
other press copy— except perhaps to Stedman. I'm not 
writing for those parties who miscall themselves critics, 
and I don't care to have them paw the book at all. It's 
my swan-song, my retirement from literature permanently, 
and I wish to pass to the cemetery unclodded. 

I judge that the proofs have begun to reach you about 
this time, as I had some (though not revises,) this morn- 
ing. I'm sure I'm going to be charmed with Beard's pict- 
ures. Observe his nice take-off of Middle-Age art-dinner- 
table scene. 

Ys sincerely 

Mark. 

Howells 's approval of the Yankee came almost in the form of 
exultant shouts, one after reading each batch of proof. First 
he wrote: "It's charming, original, wonderful! good in fancy 
and sound to the core in morals." And again, "It's a mighty 
great book, and it makes my heart burn with wrath. It seems 
God did not forget to put a soul into you. He shuts most literary 
men off with a brain, merely." Then, a few days later: "The 
book is glorious — simply noble; what masses of virgin truth 
never touched in print before!" and, finally, "Last night I read 
your last chapter. As Stedman says of the whole book, it 's 
titanic." 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, Sepi. 22, *8o. 

Dear Howells, — It is immensely good of you to grind 
through that stuff for me; but it gives peace to Mrs. 
Clemens' s soul; and I am as grateful to you as a body can 

513 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



be. I am glad you approve of what I say about the French 
Revolution. Few people will. It is odd that even to this 
day Americans still observe that immortal benefaction 
through English and other monarchical eyes, and have 
no shred of an opinion about it that they didn't get at 
second-hand. 

Next to the 4th of July and its results, it was the noblest 
and the holiest thing and the most precious that ever hap- 
pened in this earth. And its gracious work is not done yet 
— not anywhere in the remote neighborhood of it. 

Don't trouble to send me all the proofs; send me the 
pages with your corrections on them, and waste-basket 
the rest. We issue the book Dec. 10; consequently a 
notice that appears Dec. 20 will be just in good time. 

I am waiting to see your Study set a fashion in criti- 
cism. When that happens — as please God it must — 
consider that if you lived three centuries you couldn't 
do a more valuable work for this country, or a humaner. 

As a rule a critic's dissent merely enrages, and so does 
no good ; but by the new art which you use, your dissent 
must be as welcome as your approval, and as valuable. 
I do not know what the secret of it is, unless it is your 
attitude — man courteously reasoning with man and 
brother, in place of the worn and wearisome critical 
attitude of all this long time — superior being lecturing a 
boy. 

Well, my book is written — let it go. But if it were 
only to write over again there wouldn't be so many things 
left out. They burn in me; and they keep multiplying 
and multiplying; but now they can't ever be said. And 
besides, they would require a library — and a pen warmed- 
up in hell. 

Ys Evcr Mark. 

The type-setting machine began to loom large in the back- 
ground. Clemens believed it perfected by this time. Paige 
had got it together again and it was running steadily — or ap- 
proximately so— setting type at a marvelous speed and with 

5H 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



perfect accuracy. In time an expert operator would be able to 
set as high as eight thousand eras per hour, or about ten times 
as much as a good compositor could set and distribute by hand. 
Those who saw it were convinced— most of them— that the 
type-setting problem was solved by this great mechanical 
miracle. If there were any who doubted, it was because of its 
marvelous! y minute accuracy which the others only admired. 
Such accuracy, it was sometimes whispered, required absolutely 
perfect adjustment, and what would happen when the great 
inventor— "the poet in steel," as Clemens once called him — 
was no longer at hand to supervise and to correct the slightest 
variation. But no such breath of doubt came to Mark Twain; 
he believed the machine as reliable as a constellation. 

But now there was need of capital to manufacture and market 
the wonder. Clemens, casting about in his mind, remembered 
Senator Jones, of Nevada, a man of great wealth, and his old 
friend, Joe Goodman, of Nevada, in whom Jones had unlimited 
confidence. He wrote to Goodman, and in this letter we get 
a pretty full exposition of the whole matter as it stood in the 
fall of 1889. We note in this communication that Clemens says 
that he has been at the machine three years and seven months, 
but this was only the period during which he had spent the 
regular monthly sum of three thousand dollars. His interest 
in the invention had begun as far back as 1880. 

To Joseph T. Goodman, in Nevada: 

Private. Hartford, Oct. 7, *8o. 

Dear Joe, — I had a letter from Aleck Badlam day 
before yesterday, and in answering him I mentioned a 
matter which I asked him to consider a secret except to 
you and John McComb, 1 as I am not ready yet to get into 
the newspapers. 

I have come near writing you about this matter several 
times, but it wasn't ripe, and I waited. It is ripe, now. 
It is a type-setting machine which I undertook to build 
for the inventor (for a consideration). I have been at it 
three years and seven months without losing a day, at a 

1 This is Col. McComb, of the A Ita- California, who had sent Mark 
Twain on the Quaker City excursion. 

5'5 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



cost of $3,000 a month, and in so private a way that Hart- 
ford has known nothing about it. Indeed only a dozen 
men have known of the matter. I have reported progress 
from time to time to the proprietors of the N. Y. Sun, 
Herald, Times, World, Harper Brothers and John F. 
Trow; also to the proprietors of the Boston Herald and 
the Boston Globe. Three years ago I asked all these 
people to squelch their frantic desire to load up their 
offices with the Mergenthaler (N. Y. Tribune) machine, 
and wait for mine and then choose between the two. They 
have waited — with no very gaudy patience — but still they 
have waited; and I could prove to them to-day that they 
have not lost anything by it. But I reserve the proof for 
the present — except in the case of the N. Y. Herald; I 
sent an invitation there the other day — a courtesy due a 
paper which ordered $240,000 worth of our machines long 
ago when it was still in a crude condition. The Herald 
has ordered its foreman to come up here next Thursday; 
but that is the only invitation which will go out for some 
time yet. 

The machine was finished several weeks ago, and has 
been running ever since in the machine shop. It is a 
magnificent creature of steel, all of Pratt & Whitney's 
superbest workmanship, and as nicely adjusted and as 
accurate as a watch. In construction it is as elaborate 
and complex as that machine which it ranks next to, by 
every right — Man — and in performance it is as simple 
and sure. 

Anybody can set type on it who can read — and can do it 
after only 15 minutes' instruction. The operator does 
not need to leave his seat at the keyboard; for the reason 
that he is not required to do anything but strike the keys 
and set type — merely one function; the spacing, justify- 
ing, emptying into the galley, and distributing of dead 
matter is all done by the machine without anybody's 
help — four functions. 

The ease with which a cub can learn is surprising. Day 
before yesterday I saw our newest cub set, perfectly space 

516 



« 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and perfectly justify 2,150 ems of solid nonpareil in an 
hour and distribute the like amount in the same hour — 
and six hours previously he had never seen the machine 
or its keyboard. It was a good hour's work for 3 -year 
v€terans on the other type-setting machines to do. We 
have 3 cubs. The dean of the trio is a school youth of 18. 
Yesterday morning he had been an apprentice on the 
machine 16 working days (8-hour days); and we speeded 
him to see what he could do in an hour. In the hour he 
set 5,900 ems solid nonpareil, and the machine perfectly 
spaced and justified it, and of course distributed the like 
amount in the same hour. Considering that a good fair 
compositor sets 700 and distributes 700 in the one hour, 
this boy did the work of about 2>yi compositors in that 
hour. This fact sends all other type-setting machines a 
thousand miles to the rear, and the best of them will 
never be heard of again after we publicly exhibit in New 
York. 

We shall put on 3 more cubs. We have one school boy 
and two compositors, now, and we think of putting on a 
type writer, a stenographer, and perhaps a shoemaker, 
to show that no special gifts or training are required with 
this machine. We shall train these beginners two or 
three months — or until some one of them gets up to 7,000 
an hour — then we will show up in New York and run the 
machine 24 hours a day 7 days in the week, for several 
months — to prove that this is a machine which will never 
get out of order or cause delay, and can stand anything 
an anvil can stand. You know there is no other type- 
setting machine that can run two hours on a stretch with- 
out causing trouble and delay with its incurable caprices. 

We own the whole field — every inch of it — and nothing 
can dislodge us. 

Now then, above is my preachment, and here follows 
the reason and purpose of it. I want you to run over 
here, roost over the machine a week and satisfy yourself, 
and then go to John P. Jones or to whom you please, and 
sell me a hundred thousand dollars' worth of this property 

517 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and take ten per cent in cash or the "property" for your 
trouble — the latter, if you are wise, because the price I 
ask is a long way short of the value. 

What I call "property" is this. A small part of my 
ownership consists of a royalty of $500 on every machine 
marketed under the American patents. My selling-terms 
are, a permanent royalty of orie dollar on every American- 
marketed machine for a thousand dollars cash to me in 
hand paid. We shan't market any fewer than 15,000 
machines in 15 years — a return of fifteen thousand dollars 
for one thousand. A royalty is better than stock, in one 
way — it must be paid, every six months, rain or shine; 
it is a debt, and must be paid before dividends are de- 
clared. By and by, when we become a stock company I 
shall buy these royalties back for stock if I can get them 
for anything like reasonable terms. 

I have never borrowed a penny to use on the machine, 
and never sold a penny's worth of the property until the 
machine was entirely finished and proven by the severest 
tests to be what she started out to be — perfect, per- 
manent, and occupying the position, as regards all kin- 
dred machines, which the City of Paris occupies as regards 
the canvas-backs of the mercantile marine. 

It is my purpose to sell two hundred dollars of my 
royalties at the above price during the next two months 
and keep the other $300. 

Mrs. Clemens begs Mrs. Goodman to come with you, 
and asks pardon for not writing the message herself — 
which would be a pathetically-welcome spectacle to me; 
for I have been her amanuensis for 8 months, now, since 
her eyes failed her. Y ours as always 

Mark. 

While this letter with its amazing contents is on its way to 
astonish Joe Goodman, we will consider one of quite a different, 
but equally characteristic sort. We may assume that Mark 
Twain's sister Pamela had been visiting him in Hartford and 
was now making a visit in Keokuk. 

518 

\ 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To Mrs. Mofiett, in Keokuk: 

Hartford, Oct. g % % 8g. 

Dear Pamela,-— An hour after you left I was suddenly 
struck with a realizing sense of the utter chuckleheaded- 
ness of that notion of mine: to send your trunk after you. 
Land ! it was idiotic. None but a lunatic would separate 
himself from his baggage. 

Well, I am soulfully glad the baggage f etcher saved me 
from consummating my insane inspiration. I met him 
on the street in the afternoon and paid him again. I 
shall pay him several times more, as opportunity offers. 

I declined the invitation to banquet with the visiting 
South American Congress, in a polite note explaining that 
I had to go to New York to-day. I conveyed the note 
privately to Patrick; he got the envelope soiled, and 
asked Livy to put on a clean one. That is why I am going 
to the banquet; also why I have disinvited the boys I 
thought I was going to punch billiards with, upstairs 
to-night. 

Patrick is one of the injudiciousest people I ever struck. 
And I am the other. 

Your Brother 

Sam. 

The Yankee was now ready for publication, and advance 
sheets were already in the reviewers' hands. Just at this moment 
the Brazilian monarchy crumbled, and Clemens was moved to 
write Sylvester Baxter, of the Boston Herald, a letter which is 
of special interest in its prophecy of the new day, the dawn of 
which was even nearer than he suspected. 

Dear Mr. Baxter, — Another throne has gone down, 
and I swim in oceans of satisfaction. I wish I might live 
fifty years longer; I believe I should see the thrones of 
Europe selling at auction for old iron. I believe I should 
really see the end of what is surely the grotesqucst of all 
the swindles ever invented by man — monarchy. It is 
enough to make a graven image laugh, to see apparently 

519 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



rational people, away down here in this wholesome and 
merciless slaughter-day for shams, still mouthing empty 
reverence for those moss-backed frauds and scoundrel- 
isms, hereditary kingship and so-called "nobility." It 
is enough to make the monarchs and nobles themselves 
laugh — and in private they do; there can be no question 
about that. I think there is only one runnier thing, and 
that is the spectacle of these bastard Americans — these 
Hamersleys and Huntingtons and such — offering cash, 
encumbered by themselves, for rotten carcases and stolen 
titles. When our great brethren the disenslaved Brazil- 
ians frame their Declaration of Independence, I hope 
they will insert this missing link: "We hold these truths 
to be self-evident: that all monarchs are usurpers, and 
descendants of usurpers; for the reason that no throne 
was ever set up in this world by the will, freely exercised, 
of the only body possessing the legitimate right to set it 
up — the numerical mass of the nation." 

You already have the advance sheets of my forthcoming 
book in your hands. If you will turn to about the five 
hundredth page, you will find a state paper of my Con- 
necticut Yankee in which he announces the dissolution 
of King Arthur's monarchy and proclaims the English 
Republic. Compare it with the state paper which an- 
nounces the downfall of the Brazilian monarchy and 
proclaims the Republic of the United States of Brazil, 
and stand by to defend the Yankee from plagiarism. 
There is merely a resemblance of ideas, nothing more. 
The Yankee's proclamation was already in print a week 
ago. This is merely one of those odd coincidences which 
are always turning up. Come, protect the Yank from 
that cheapest and easiest of all charges — plagiarism. 
Otherwise, you see, he will have to protect himself by 
charging approximate and indefinite plagiarism upon the 
official servants of our majestic twin down yonder, and 
then there might be war, or some similar annoyance. 

Have you noticed the rumor that the Portuguese throne 
is unsteady, and that the Portuguese slaves are getting 

520 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

restive? Also, that the head slave-driver of Europe, 
Alexander III, has so reduced his usual monthly order for 
chains that the Russian foundries are running on only 
half time now? Also that other rumor that English 
nobility acquired an added stench the other day — and 
had to ship it to India and the continent because there 
wasn't any more room for it at home? Things are work- 
ing. By and by there is going to be an emigration, may 
be. Of course we shall make no preparation; we never 
do. In a few years from now we shall have nothing but 
played-out kings and dukes on the police, and driving 
the horse-cars, and whitewashing fences, and in fact 
overcrowding all the avenues of unskilled labor; and then 
we shall wish, when it is too late, that we had taken 
common and reasonable precautions and drowned them 
at Castle Garden. 

There followed at this time a number of letters to Goodman, 
but as there is much of a sameness in them, we need not print 
them all. Clemens, in fact, kept the mails warm with letters 
bulging with schemes for capitalization, and promising vast 
wealth to all concerned. When the letters did not go fast enough 
he sent telegrams. In one of the letters Goodman is promised 
"five hundred thousand dollars out of the profits before we get 
anything ourselves." One thing we gather from these letters 
is that Paige has taken the machine apart again, never satisfied 
with its perfection, or perhaps getting a hint that certain of its 
perfections were not permanent. A letter at the end of November 
seems worth preserving here. 

To Joseph T. Goodman, in California: 

Hartford, Nov. 2Q, *8g. 

Dear Job,— Things are getting into better and more 
flexible shape every day. Papers are now being drawn 
which will greatly simplify the raising of capital; I shall 
be in supreme command ; it will not be necessary for the 
capitalist to arrive at terms with anybody but me. I 
don't want to dicker with anybody but Jones. I know 

521 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



him; that is to say, I want to dicker with you, and 
through you with Jones. Try to see if you can't be here 
by the 15th of January. 

The machine was as perfect as a watch when we took 
her apart the other day; but when she goes together 
again the 15th of January we expect her to be perfecter 
than a watch. 

Joe, I want you to sell some royalties to the boys out 
there, if you can, for I want to be financially strong when 
we go to New York. You know the machine, and you 
appreciate its future enormous career better than any 
man I know. At the lowest conceivable estimate (2,000 
machines a year,) we shall sell 34,000 in the life of the 
patent — 17 years. 

All the family send love to you — and they mean it, or 
they wouldn't say it. 

Yours ever 

Mark. 

The Yankee had come from the press, and Howells had praised 
it in the "Editor's Study" in Harper's Magazine. He had 
given it his highest commendation, and it seems that his opinion 
of it did not change with time. "Of all fanciful schemes of fiction 
it pleases me most," he in one place declared, and again referred 
to it as "a greatly imagined and symmetrically developed tale." 

In more than one letter to Goodman, Clemens had urged him 
to come East without delay. "Take the train, Joe, and come 
along," he wrote early in December. And we judge from the 
following that Joe had decided to come. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, Dec. 23, '8q. 
• Dear Howells, — The magazine came last night, and 
the Study notice is just great. The satisfaction it affords 
us could not be more prodigious if the book deserved 
every word of it; and maybe it does; I hope it does, 
though of course I can't realize it and believe it. But I 
am your grateful servant, anyway and always, 

522 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

I am going to read to the Cadets at West Point Jan. iz. 
I go from here to New York the 9th, and up to the Point 
the nth. Can't you go with me? It's great fun. I'm 
going to read the passages in the 44 Yankee" in which the 
Yankee's West Point cadets figure — and shall covertly 
work in a lecture on aristocracy to those boys. I am to 
be the guest of the Superintendent, but if you will go I 
will shake him and we will go to the hotel. He is a splen- 
did fellow, and I know him well enough to take that 
liberty. 

And won't you give me a day or two's visit toward the 
end of January? For two reasons: the machine will be 
at work again by that time, and we want to hear the rest 
of the dream-story; Mrs. Clemens keeps speaking about 
it and hankering for it. And we can have Joe Goodman 
on hand again by that time, and I want you to get to 
know him thoroughly. It's well worth it. I am going 
to run up and stay over night with you as soon as I can 
get a chance. 

We are in the full rush of the holidays now, and an 
awful rush it is, too. You ought to have been here the 
other day, to make that day perfect and complete. All 
alone I managed to inflict agonies on Mrs. Clemens, 
whereas I was expecting nothing but praises. I made a 
party call the day after the party — and called the lady 
down from breakfast to receive it. I then left there and 
called on a new bride, who received me in her dressing- 
gown; and as things went pretty well, I stayed to lunch- 
eon. The error here was, that the appointed reception- 
hour was 3 in the afternoon, and not at the bride's house 
but at her aunt's in another part of the town. However, 
as I meant well, none of these disasters distressed me. 

Yrs ever 

Mark. 

The Yankee did not find a very hearty welcome in England. 
English readers did not fancy any burlesque of their Arthurian 
talcs, or American strictures on their institutions. Mark Twain's 

523 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



publishers had feared this, and asked that the story be especially 
edited for the English edition. Clemens, however, would not 
listen to any suggestions of the sort. 

To Messrs. Chatto & Windus, in London, Eng.: 

Gentlemen, — Concerning The Yankee, I have already 
revised the story twice; and it has been read critically 
by W. D. Howells and Edmund Clarence Stedman, and 
my wife has caused me to strike out several passages 
that have been brought to her attention, and to soften 
others. Furthermore, I have read chapters of the book 
in public where Englishmen were present and have 
profited by their suggestions. 

Now, mind you, I have taken all this pains because I 
wanted to say a Yankee mechanic's say against monarchy 
and its several natural props, and yet make a book which 
you would be willing to print exactly as it comes to you, 
without altering a word. 

We are spoken of (by Englishmen) as a thin-skinned 
people. It is you who are thin-skinned. An Englishman 
may write with the most brutal frankness about any 
man or institution among us and we re-publish him with- 
out dreaming of altering a line or a word. But England 
cannot stand that kind of a book written about herself. 
It is England that is thin-skinned. It causeth me to 
smile when I read the modifications of my language which 
have been made in my English editions to fit them for 
the sensitive English palate. 

Now, as I say, I have taken laborious pains to so trim 
this book of offense that you might not lack the nerve 
to print it just as it stands. I am going to get the proofs 
to you just as early as I can. I want you to read it care- 
fully. If you can publish it without altering a single 
word, go ahead. Otherwise, please hand it to J. R. Osgood 
in time for him to have it published at my expense. 

This is important, for the reason that the book was not 
written for America ; it was written for England. So many 
Englishmen have done their sincerest best to teach us 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



something for our betterment that it seems to me high 
time that some of us should substantially recognize the 
good intent by trying to pry up the English nation to a 
little higher level of manhood in turn. 

Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The English nation, at least a considerable portion of it, did 
not wish to be "pried up to a higher level of manhood " by a Con- 
necticut Yankee. The papers pretty generally denounced the 
book as coarse; in fact, a vulgar travesty. Some of the critics 
concluded that England, after all, had made a mistake in admir- 
ing Mark Twain. Clemens stood this for a time and then seems 
to have decided that something should be done. One of the fore- 
most of English critics was his friend and admirer; he would 
state the case to him fully and invite his assistance. 

To Andrew Lang, in London: 
[First page missing.) 

1889. 

They vote but do not print. The head tells you pretty 
promptly whether the food is satisfactory or not; and 
everybody hears, and thinks the whole man has spoken. 
It is a delusion. Only his taste and his smell have been 
heard from — important, both, in a way, but these do not 
build up the man, and preserve his life and fortify it. 

The little child is permitted to label its drawings "This 
is a cow — this is a horse," and so on. This protects the 
child. It saves it from the sorrow and wrong of hearing 
its cows and its horses criticized as kangaroos and work- 
benches. A man who is white-washing a fence is doing a 
useful thing, so also is the man who is adorning a rich 
man's house with costly frescoes; and all of us are sane 
enough to judge these performances by standards proper 
to each. Now, then, to be fair, an author ought to be 
allowed to put upon his book an explanatory line: "This 
is written for the Head; "This is written for the Belly 
and the Members." And the critic ought to hold himself 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



in honor bound to put away from him his ancient habit 
of judging all books by one standard, and thenceforth 
follow a fairer course. 

The critic assumes, every time, that if a book doesn't 
meet the cultivated-class standard, it isn't valuable. 
Let us apply his law all around: for if it is sound in the 
case of novels, narratives, pictures, and such things, it is 
certainly sound and applicable to all the steps which lead 
up to culture and make culture possible. It condemns 
the spelling book, for a spelling book is of no use to a 
person of culture; it condemns all school books and all 
schools which lie between the child's primer and Greek, 
and between the infant school and the university; it 
condemns all the rounds of art which lie between the cheap 
terra cotta groups and the Venus de Medici, and between 
the chromo and the Transfiguration ; it requires Whitcomb 
Riley to sing no more till he can sing like Shakespeare, 
and it forbids all amateur music and will grant its sanction 
to nothing below the "classic." 

Is this an extravagant statement? No, it is a mere 
statement of fact. It is the fact itself that is extravagant 
and grotesque. And what is the result? This— and it is 
sufficiently curious: the critic has actually imposed upon 
the world the superstition that a painting by Raphael is 
more valuable to the civilizations of the earth than is a 
chromo; and the august opera than the hurdy-gurdy and 
the villagers' singing society; and Homer than the little 
everybody's-poet whose rhymes are in all mouths to-day 
and will be in nobody's mouth next generation; and the 
Latin classics than Kipling's far-reaching bugle-note; 
and Jonathan Edwards than the Salvation Army; and 
the Venus de Medici than the plaster-cast peddler; the 
superstition, in a word, that the vast and awful comet that 
trails its cold lustre through the remote abysses of space 
once a century and interests and instructs a cultivated 
handful of astronomers is worth more to the world than 
the sun which warms and cheers all the nations every day 
and makes the crops to grow. 

526 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



If a critic should start a religion it would not have any 
object but to convert angels: and they wouldn't need it. 
The thin top crust of humanity — the cultivated — are 
worth pacifying, worth pleasing, worth coddling, worth 
nourishing and preserving with dainties and delicacies, 
it is true; but to be caterer to that little faction is no very 
dignified or valuable occupation, it seems to me; it is 
merely feeding the over-fed, and there must be small 
satisfaction in that. It is not that little minority who are 
already saved that are best worth trying to uplift, I 
should think, but the mighty mass of the uncultivated 
who are underneath. That mass will never see the Old 
Masters — that sight is for the few; but the chromo maker 
can lift them all one step upward toward appreciation 
of art ; they cannot have the opera, but the hurdy-gurdy 
and the singing class lift them a little way toward that far 
light; they will never know Homer, but the passing 
rhymester of their day leaves them higher than he found 
them; they may never even hear of the Latin classics, but 
they will strike step with Kipling's drum-beat, and they 
will march; for all Jonathan Edwards's help they 
would die in their slums, but the Salvation Army will 
beguile some of them up to pure air and a cleaner life; 
they know no sculpture, the Venus is not even a name to 
them, but they are a grade higher in the scale of civiliza- 
tion by the ministrations of the plaster-cast than they 
were before it took its place upon their mantel and made 
it beautiful to their unexacting eyes. 

Indeed I have been misjudged, from the very first. I 
have never tried in even one single instance, to help culti- 
vate the cultivated classes. I was not equipped for it, 
either by native gifts or training. And I never had any 
ambition in that direction, but always hunted for bigger 
game — the masses. I have seldom deliberately tried to 
instruct them, but have done my best to entertain them. 
To simply amuse them would have satisfied my dearest 
ambition at any time; for they could get instruction 
elsewhere, and I had two chances to help to the teacher's 

5*7 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



one: for amusement is a good preparation for study and 
a good healer of fatigue after it. My audience is dumb, 
it has no voice in print, and so I cannot know whether I 
have won its approbation or only got its censure. 

Yes, you see, I have always catered for the Belly and 
the Members, but have been served like the others — criti- 
cized from the culture-standard — to my sorrow and pain; 
because, honestly, I never cared what became of the cul- 
tured classes; they could go to the theatre and the opera, 
they had no use for me and the melodeon. 

And now at last I arrive at my object and tender my 
petition, making supplication to this effect: that the 
critics adopt a rule recognizing the Belly and the Mem- 
bers, and formulate a standard whereby work done for 
them shall be judged. Help me, Mr. Lang; no voice can 
reach further than yours in a case of this kind, or carry 
greater weight of authority. 

Lang's reply was an article in the Illustrated London News 
on "The Art of Mark Twain." Lang had no admiration to ex- 
press for the Yankee, which he confessed he had not cared to 
read, but he glorified Ruck Finn to the highest. "I can never 
forget, nor be ungrateful for the exquisite pleasure with which 
I read Huckleberry Finn for the first time, years ago," he wrote; 
"I read it again last night, deserting Kenilworth for Buck. I 
never laid it down till I had finished it." 

Lang closed his article by referring to the story of Buck as 
the "great American novel which had escaped the eyes of those 
who watched to see this new planet swim into their ken." 



Digitized by Google 



XXX 



LETTERS, 1890, CHIEFLY TO JOS. T. GOODMAN. THE 

GREAT MACHINE ENTERPRISE 

DR. JOHN BROWN'S son, whom Mark Twain and his 
wife had known in 1873 as "Jock," sent copies of Dr. 
John Brawn and His Sister Isabella, by E. T. McLaren. It was 
a gift appreciated in the Clemens home. 

To Mr. John Brown, in Edinburgh, Scotland: 

Hartford, Feby it, 1800. 
Dear Mr. Brown,— Both copies came, and we are 
reading and re-reading the one, and lending the other, to 
old time adorers of M Rab and his Friends." It is an ex- 
quisite book; the perfection of literary workmanship. It 
says in every line, "Don't look at me, look at him 9 * — and 
one tries to be good and obey; but the charm of the 
painter is so strong that one can't keep his entire atten- 
tion on the developing portrait, but must steal side- 
glimpses of the artist, and try to divine the trick of her 
felicitous brush. In this book the doctor lives and moves 
just as he was. He was the most extensive slave-holder 
of his time, and the kindest; and yet he died without 
setting one of his bondmen free. We all send our very, 
very kindest regards. 

Sincerely yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

If Mark Twain had been less interested in the type-setting 
machine he might possibly have found a profit that winter in 
the old Sellers play, which he had written with Howells seven 

5*9 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



years before. The play had eventually been produced at the 
Lyceum Theatre in New York, with A. P. Bur bank in the leading 
role, and Clemens and Howells as financial backers. But it 
was a losing investment, nor did it pay any better when Clemens 
finally sent Burbank with it on the road. Now, however, James 
A. Heme, a well-known actor and playwright, became interested 
in the idea, after a discussion of the matter with Howells, and 
there seemed a probability that with changes made under Heme's 
advisement the play might be made sensible and successful. 

But Mark Twain's greater interest was now all in the type- 
machine, and certainly he had no money to put into any other 
venture. His next letter to Goodman is illuminating — the 
urgency of his need for funds opposed to that conscientiousness 
which was one of the most positive forces of Mark Twain's 
body spiritual. The Mr. Arnot of this letter was an Elrnira 
capitalist. 

To Jos, T. Goodman, in California: 

Hartford, March 31, '90. 

Dear Joe, — If you were here, I should say, "Get you 
to Washington and beg Senator Jones to take the chances 
and put up about ten or" — no, I wouldn't. The money 
would burn a hole in my pocket and get away from me 
if the furnisher of it were proceeding upon merely your 
judgment and mine and without other evidence. It is 
too much of a responsibility. 

But I am in as close a place to-day as ever I was; $3 ,000 
due for the last month's machine-expenses, and the purse 
empty. I notified Mr. Arnot a month ago that I should 
want $5,000 to-day, and his check arrived last night; but 
I sent it back to him, because when he bought of me on 
the 9th of December I said that I would not draw upon 
him for 3 months, and that before that date Senator Jones 
would have examined the machine and approved, or done 
the other thing. If Jones should arrive here a week or 
ten days from now (as he expects to do,) and should not 
approve, and shouldn't buy any royalties, my deal with 
Arnot would not be symmetrically square, and then how 
could I refund? The surest way was to return his check. 

530 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I have talked with the madam, and here is the result. 
I will go down to the factory and notify Paige that I will 
scrape together $6,000 to meet the March and April 
expenses, and will retire on the 30th of April and return 
the assignment to him if in the meantime I have not found 
financial relief. 

It is very rough ; for the machine does at last seem per- 
fect, and just a bird to go ! I think she's going to be good 
for 8,000 ems an hour in the hands of a good ordinary man 
after a solid year's practice. I may be in error, but I 
most solidly believe it. 

There's an improved Mergen thaler in New York; 
Paige and Davis and I watched it two whole afternoons. 

With the love of us all, 

Mark. 

Amot wrote Clemens urging him to accept the check for 
five thousand dollars in this moment of need. Clemens was 
probably as sorely tempted to compromise with his conscience 
as he had ever been in his life, but his resolution held firm. 

To M. H. Arnot, in Elmira, N. Y.: 

Mr. M. H. Arnot 

Dear Sir,— No— no, I could not think of taking it, 
with you unsatisfied; and you ought not to be satisfied 
until you have made personal examination of the machine 
and had a consensus of testimony of disinterested people, 
besides. My own perfect knowledge of what is required 
of such a machine, and my perfect knowledge of the fact 
that this is the only machine that can meet that require- 
ment, make it difficult for me to realize that a doubt is 
possible to less well-posted men; and so I would have 
taken your money without thinking, and thus would have 
done a great wrong to you and a great one to myself. 
And now that I go back over the ground, I remember that 
when I said I could get along 3 months without drawing 
on you, that delay contemplated a visit from you to the 
machine in the interval, and your satisfaction with its 

53 1 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



character and prospects. I had forgotten all that. But 
I remember it now; and the fact that it was not "so 
nominated in the bond" does not alter the case or justify 
me in making my call so prematurely. I do not know 
that you regarded all that as a part of the bargain — for 
you were thoroughly and magnanimously unexacting — 
but I so regarded it, notwithstanding I have so easily 
managed to forget all about it. 

You so gratified me, and did me so much honor in 
bonding yourself to me in a large sum, upon no evidence 
but my word and with no protection but my honor, that 
my pride in that is much stronger than my desire to reap 
a money advantage from it. 

With the sincerest appreciation I am 

Truly yours 

S L. Clemens. 

P. S. I have written a good many words and yet I 
seem to have failed to say the main thing in exact enough 
language — which is, that the transaction between us is 
not complete and binding until you shall have convinced 
yourself that the machine's character and prospects are 
satisfactory. 

I ought to explain that the grippe delayed us some 
weeks, and that we have since been waiting for Mr. Jones. 
When he was ready, we were not ; and now we have been 
ready more than a month, while he has been kept in 
Washington by the Silver bill. He said the other day that 
to venture out of the Capitol for a day at this time could 
easily chance to hurt him if the bill came up for action, 
meantime, although it couldn't hurt the bill, which would 
pass anyway. Mrs. Jones said she would send me two or 
three days' notice, right after the passage of the bill, and 
that they would follow as soon as I should return word 
that their coming would not inconvenience us. I suppose 
I ought to go to New York without waiting for Mr. Jones, 
but it would not be wise to go there without money. 

The bill is still pending. 

532 

-% 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The Mergenthaler machine, like the Paige, was also at this 
time in the middle stages of experimental development. It 
was a slower machine, but it was simpler, less expensive, oc- 
cupied less room. There was not so much about it to get out 
of order; it was not so delicate, not so human. These were im- 
mense advantages. 

But no one at this time could say with certainty which type- 
setter would reap the harvest of millions. It was only sure 
that at least one of them would, and the Mergenthaler people 
were willing to trade stock for stock with the Paige com- 
pany in order to insure financial success for both, whichever 
won. Clemens, with a faith that never faltered, declined this 
offer, a decision that was to cost him millions. 

Winter and spring had gone and summer had come, but still 
there had been no financial conclusion with Jones, Mackay, and 
the other rich Calif ornians who were to put up the necessary 
million for the machine's manufacture. Goodman was spending 
a large part of his time traveling back and forth between Cali- 
fornia and Washington, trying to keep business going at both 
ends. Paige spent most of his tune working out improvements 
for the type-setter, delicate attachments which complicated its 
construction more and more. 

To Joe T. Goodman, in Washington: 

Hartford, June 22, *oo. 

Dear Joe, — I have been sitting by the machine 2}4 
hours, this afternoon, and my admiration of it towers 
higher than ever. There is no sort of mistake about it, 
it is the Big Bonanza. In the 2>£ hours, the time lost 
by type-breakage was 3 minutes. 

This machine is totally without a rival. Rivalry with 
it is impossible. Last Friday, Fred Whitmore (it was the 
28th day of his apprenticeship on the machine) stacked 
up 49,700 ems of solid nonpareil in 8 hours, and the type- 
breaking delay was only 6 minutes for the day. 

I claim yet, as I have always claimed, that the machine's 
market (abroad and here together,) is today worth 
$150,000,000, without saying anything about the doubling 
and trebling of this sum that will follow within the life 

533 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



of the patents. Now here is a queer fact: I am one of 
the wealthiest grandees in America — one of the Vander- 
bilt gang, in fact — and yet if you asked me to lend you a 
couple of dollars I should have to ask you to take my note 
instead. 

It makes me cheerful to sit by the machine: come up 
with Mrs. Goodman and refresh yourself with a draught 
of the same. Ys ever Mark. 

The machine was still breaking the types now and then, and no 
doubt Paige was itching to take it to pieces, and only restrained 
by force from doing so. He was never thoroughly happy unless 
he was taking the machine apart or setting it up again. Finally, 
he was allowed to go at it — a disasterous permission, for it was 
just then that Jones decided to steal a day or two from the 
Silver Bill and watch the type-setter in operation. Paige already 
had it in parts when this word came from Goodman, and Jones's 
visit had to be called off. His enthusiasm would seem to have 
weakened from that day. In July, Goodman wrote that both 
Mackay and Jones had become somewhat diffident in the 
matter of huge capitalization. He thought it partly due, at 
least, to "the fatal delays that have sicklied over the bloom of 
original enthusiasm." Clemens himself went down to Wash- 
ington and perhaps warmed Jones with his eloquence; at least, 
Jones seemed to have agreed to make some effort in the matter, 
a qualified promise, the careful word of a wary politician and 
capitalist. How many Washington trips were made is not cer- 
tain, but certainly more than one. Jones would seem to have 
suggested forms of contracts, but if he came to the point of 
signing any there is no evidence of it to-day. 

Any one who has read Mark Twain's, A Connecticut Yankee 
in King Arthur's Court" has a pretty good idea of his opinion 
of kings in general, and tyrants in particular. Rule by "divine 
right," however liberal, was distasteful to him; where it meant 
oppression it stirred him to violence. In his article, "The Czar's 
Soliloquy," he gave himself loose rein concerning atrocities 
charged to the master of Russia, and in a letter which he wrote 
during the summer of x8oo, he offered a hint as to remedies. 
The letter was written by editorial request, but was never mailed. 
Perhaps it seemed too openly revolutionary at the moment. 

S34 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Yet scarcely more than a quarter of a century was needed to 
make it "timely." Clemens and his family were spending some 
weeks in the Catskills when it was written. 

An unpublished letter on the Czar. 

Onteora, i 8 go. 

To the Editor op Free Russia,— I thank you for the 
compliment of your invitation to say something, but 
when I ponder the bottom paragraph on your fast page, 
and then study your statement on your third page, of 
the objects of the several Russian liberation-parties, I 
do not quite know how to proceed. Let me quote here 
the paragraph referred to: 

"But men's hearts are so made that the sight of one 
voluntary victim for a noble idea stirs them more deeply 
than the sight of a crowd submitting to a dire fate they 
cannot escape. Besides, foreigners could not see so clearly 
as the Russians how much the Government was respons- 
ible for the grinding poverty of the masses; nor could 
they very well realize the moral wretchedness imposed 
by that Government upon the whole of educated Russia. 
But the atrocities committed upon the defenceless pris- 
oners are there in all their baseness, concrete and palpable, 
admitting of no excuse, no doubt or hesitation, crying 
out to the heart of humanity against Russian tyranny. 
And the Tzar's Government, stupidly confident in its 
apparently unassailable position, instead of taking warn- 
ing from the first rebukes, seems to mock this humani- 
tarian age by the aggravation of brutalities. Not satis- 
fied with slowly killing its prisoners, and with burying 
the flower of our young generation in the Siberian desserts, 
the Government of Alexander III. resolved to break their 
spirit by deliberately submitting them to a regime of 
unheard-of brutality and degradation." 

When one reads that paragraph in the glare of George 
Herman's revelations, and considers how much it means; 
considers that all earthly figures fail to typify the Czar's 

535 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



government, and that one must descend into hell to find 
its counterpart, one turns hopefully to your statement of 
the objects of the several liberation-parties — and is dis- 
appointed. Apparently none of them can bear to think of 
losing the present hell entirely, they merely want the 
temperature cooled down a little. 

I now perceive why all men are the deadly and uncom- 
promising enemies of the rattlesnake: it is merely because 
the rattlesnake has not speech. Monarchy has speech, 
and by it has been able to persuade men that it differs 
somehow from the rattlesnake, has something valuable 
about it somewhere, something worth preserving, some- 
thing even good and high and fine, when properly "modi- 
fied," something entitling it to protection from the club 
of the first comer who catches it out of its hole. It seems 
a most strange delusion and not reconcilable with our 
superstition that man is a reasoning being. If a house is 
afire, we reason confidently that it is the first comer's 
plain duty to put the fire out in any way he can — drown 
it with water, blow it up with dynamite, use any and all 
means to stop the spread of the fire and save the rest of 
the city. What is the Czar of Russia but a house afire 
in the midst of a city of eighty millions of inhabitants? 
Yet instead of extinguishing him, together with his nest 
and system, the liberation-parties are all anxious to 
merely cool him down a little and keep him. 

It seems to me that this is illogical — idiotic, in fact. 
Suppose you had this granite-hearted, bloody-jawed 
maniac of Russia loose in your house, chasing the help- 
less women and little children— your own. What would 
you do with him, supposing you had a shotgun? Well, 
he is loose in your house — Russia. And with your shot- 
gun in your hand, you stand trying to think up ways to 
"modify" him. 

Do these liberation-parties think that they can succeed 
in a project which has been attempted a million times in 
the history of the world and has never in one single in- 
stance been successful — the "modification" of a despot- 

536 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ism by other means than bloodshed? They seem to 
think they can. My privilege to write these sanguinary 
sentences in soft security was bought for me by rivers of 
blood poured upon many fields, in many lands, but I 
possess not one single little paltry right or privilege that 
come to me as a result of petition, persuasion, agitation 
for reform, or any kindred method of procedure. When we 
consider that not even the most responsible English 
monarch ever yielded back a stolen public right until it was 
wrenched from them by bloody violence, is it rational to 
suppose that gentler methods can win privileges in Russia? 

Of course I know that the properest way to demolish 
the Russian throne would be by revolution. But it is not 
possible to get up a revolution there; so the only thing 
left to do, apparently, is to keep the throne vacant by 
dynamite until a day when candidates shall decline with 
thanks. Then organize the Republic. And on the whole 
this method has some large advantages; for whereas a 
revolution destroys some lives which cannot well be 
spared, the dynamite way doesn't. Consider this: the 
conspirators against the Czar's life are caught in every 
rank of life, from the low to the high. And consider: if so 
many take an active part, where the peril is so dire, is 
this not evidence that the sympathizers who keep still 
and do not show their hands, are countless for multitudes? 
Can you break the hearts of thousands of families with 
the awful Siberian exodus every year for generations and 
not eventually cover all Russia from limit to limit with 
bereaved fathers and mothers and brothers and sisters 
who secretly hate the perpetrator of this prodigious crime 
and hunger and thirst for his life? Do you not believe 
that if your wife or your child or your father was exiled 
to the mines of Siberia for some trivial utterances wrung 
from a smarting spirit by the Czar's intolerable tyranny, 
and you got a chance to kill him and did not do it, that 
you would always be ashamed to be in your own society 
the rest of your life? Suppose that that refined and lovely 
Russian lady who was lately stripped bare before a brutal 

537 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



soldiery and whipped to death by the Czar's hand in the 
person of the Czar's creature had been your wife, or your 
daughter or your sister, and to-day the Czar should pass 
within reach of your hand, how would you feel — and what 
would you do? Consider, that all over vast Russia, from 
boundary to boundary, a myriad of eyes filled with tears 
when that piteous news came, and through those tears 
that myriad of eyes saw, not that poor lady, but lost 
darlings of their own whose fate her fate brought back 
with new access of grief out of a black and bitter past 
never to be forgotten or forgiven. 

If I am a Swinburnian — and clear to the marrow I 
am— I hold human nature in sufficient honor to believe 
there are eighty million mute Russians that are of the 
same stripe, and only one Russian family that isn't. 

Mark Twain. 

Type-setter matters were going badly. Clemens still had 
faith in Jones, and he had lost no grain of faith in the machine. 
The money situation, however, was troublesome. With an 
expensive establishment, and work of one sort or another still 
to be done on the machine, his income would not reach. Per- 
haps Goodman had already given up hope, for he does not seem 
to have returned from California after the next letter was 
written— a colorless letter— in which we feel a note of resignation. 
The last few lines are sufficient. 

To Joe T. Goodman, in California: 

Dear Joe, — . . . I wish you could get a day off and 
make those two or three Californians buy those privi- 
leges, for I'm going to need money before long. 

I don't know where the Senator is; but out on the 
Coast I reckon. 

I guess we've got a perfect machine at last. We never 
break a type, now, and the new device for enabling the 
operator to touch the last letters and justify the line simul- 
taneously works to a charm. 

With love to you both, 

Mark. 

538 

-\ 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The year closed gloomily enough. The type-setter seemed to 
be perfected, but capital for its manufacture was not forthcom- 
ing. The publishing business of Charles L. Webster & Co. was 
returning little or no profit. Clemens 's mother had died in 
Keokuk at the end of October, and his wife's mother, in Elmira 
a month later. Mark Twain, writing a short business letter to 
his publishing manager, Fred J. Hall, closed it: "Merry Xmas 

to you I— and I wish to God I could have one myself before I 
j • it 



Digitized by Google 



XXXI 



LETTERS, 1 89 1, TO HOWELLS, MRS. CLEMENS AND 
OTHERS. RETURN TO LITERATURE. AMERICAN 
CLAIMANT. LEAVING HARTFORD. EUROPE. 
DOWN THE RHINE 

CLEMENS was still not without hope in the machine, at 
the beginning of the new year (1 891), but it was a hope 
no longer active, and it presently became a moribund. Jones, 
on about the middle of February, backed out altogether, laying 
the blame chiefly on Mackay and the others, who, he said, had 
decided not to invest. Jones "let his victim down easy" with 
friendly words, but it was the end, for the present, at least, of 
machine financiering. 

It was also the end of Mark Twain's capital. His publishing 
business was not good. It was already in debt and needing 
more money. There was just one thing for him to do and he 
did it at once, not stopping to cry over spilt milk, but with 
good courage and the old enthusiasm that never failed him, 
he returned to the trade of authorship. He dug out half- 
finished articles and stories, finished them and sold them, and 
within a week after the Jones collapse he was at work on a novel 
based on the old Sellers idea, which eight years before he and 
Howells had worked into a play. The brief letter in which he 
reported this news to Howells bears no marks of depression, 
though the writer of it was in his fifty-sixth year; he was by 
no means well, and his financial prospects were anything but 
golden. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, Feb. 24, 'pi. 
Dear Howells, — Mrs. Clemens has been sick abed 
for near two weeks, but is up and around the room now, 

540 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and gaining. I don't know whether she has written Mrs. 
Howells or not — I only know she was going to — and will 
yet, if she hasn't. We are promising ourselves a whole 
world of pleasure in the visit, and you mustn't dream of 
disappointing us. 

Does this item stir an interest in you? Began a novel 
four days ago, and this moment finished chapter four. 
Title of the book: 

44 Colonel Mulberry Sellers. 
American Claimant 
Of the 

Great Earldom of Rossmore 
in the 

Peerage of Great Britain." 
Ys Ever 

Mark. 

Probably Mark Twain did not return to literary work re- 
luctantly. He had always enjoyed writing and felt now that 
he was equipped better than ever for authorship, at least so 
far as material was concerned. There exists a fragmentary 
copy of a letter to some unknown correspondent, in which he 
recites his qualifications. It bears evidence of having been 
written just at this time and is of unusual interest at this point. 

Fragment of Letter to i8gi: 

.... I confine myself to life with which I am familiar 
when pretending to portray life. But I confined myself 
to the boy-life out on the Mississippi because that had a 
pecu liar charm Jpr mo, ,in d not because I was not familiar 
with other phases of life. I was a soldier two weeks once 
in the beginning of the war, and was hunted like a rat 
the whole time. Familiar? My splendid Kipling himself 
hasn't a more burnt-in, hard-baked, and unforgetable 
familiarity with that death-on-the-pale-horse-with-hell- 
following-af ter, which is a raw soldier's first fortnight in the 
field— and which, without any doubt, is the most tremend- 
ous fortnight and the vividest he is ever going to see. 

U.-7 541 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Yes, and I have shoveled silver tailings in a quartz-mill 
a couple of weeks, and acquired the last possibilities of 
culture in thai direction. And I've done 44 pocket-mining M 
during three months in the one little patch of ground in 
the whole globe where Nature conceals gold in pockets — 
or did before we robbed all of those pockets and exhausted, 
obliterated, annihilated the most curious freak Nature 
ever indulged in. There are not thirty men left alive who, 
being told there was a pocket hidden on the broad slope 
of a mountain, would know how to go and find it, or have 
even the faintest idea of how to set about it; but I am 
one of the possible 20 or 30 who possess the secret, and I 
could go and put my hand on that hidden treasure with 
a most deadly precision. 

And I've been a prospector, and know pay rock from 
poor when I find it — just with a touch of the tongue. 
And I've been a silver miner and know how to dig and 
! shovel and drill and put in a blast. And so I know the 
mines and the miners interiorly as well as Bret Harte 
i knows them exteriorly. 

And I was a newspaper reporter four years in cities, 
and so saw the inside of many things; and was reporter 
in a legislature two sessions and the same in Congress one 
session, and thus learned to know personally three sample 
bodies of the smallest minds and the selfishest souls and 
the cowardliest hearts that God makes. 

And I was some years a Mississippi pilot, and familiarly 
knew all the different kinds of steamboatmen — a race 
apart, and not like other folk. 

And I was for some years a traveling 14 jour" printer, 
and wandered from city to city — and so I know that sect 
familiarly. 

And I was a lecturer on the public platform a number 
of seasons and was a responder to toasts at all the different 
kinds of banquets — and so I know a great many secrets j 
about audiences— secrets not to be got out of books, but j 
only acquirable by experience. i 

And I watched over one dear project of mine for years, 

54* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



spent a fortune on it, and failed to make it go — and the 
history of that would make a large book in which a million 
men would see themselves as in a mirror; and they would 
testify and say, Verily, this is not imagination; this fellow 
has been there— and after would cast dust upon their 
beads, cursing and blaspheming. 

And I am a publisher, and did pay to one author's 
widow (General Grant's) the largest copyright checks this 
world has seen — aggregating more than £80,000 in the 
first year. 

And I have been an author for 20 years and an ass for 55. 

Now then; as the most valuable capital or culture or 
education usable in the building of novels is personal 
experience I ought to be well equipped for that trade. 

I surely have the equipment, a wide culture, and all of 
it real, none of it artificial, for I don't know anything 
1 about books. 

[No signature.] 

Clemens for several years had been bothered by rheumatism 
in his shoulder. The return now to the steady use of the pen 
aggravated his trouble, and at times he was nearly disabled. 
The phonograph for commercial dictation had been tried ex- 
perimentally, and Mark Twain was always ready for any in- 
novation. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, Feb. 28, *gi. 
Dear Howells, — Won't you drop in at the Boylston 
Building (New England Phonograph Co) and talk into 
a phonograph in an ordinary conversation-voice and see 
if another person (who didn't hear you do it) can take the 
words from the thing without difficulty and repeat them 
to you. If the experiment is satisfactory (also make 
somebody put in a message which you don't hear, and see 
if afterward you can get it out without difficulty) won't 
you then ask them on what terms they will rent me a 
phonograph for 3 months and furnish me cylinders 
enough to carry 75,000 words. 175 cylinders, ain't it? 

543 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I don't want to erase any of them. My right arm is 
nearly disabled by rheumatism, but I am bound to write 
this book (and sell 100,000 copies of it — no, I mean a 
million — next fall) I feel sure I can dictate the book into 
a phonograph if I don't have to yell. I write 2,000 words 
a day; I think I can dictate twice as many. 

But mind, if this is going to be too much trouble to you — 
go ahead and do it, all the same. 

Ys ever Mark. 

Howells, always willing to help, visited the phonograph place, 
and a few days later reported results. He wrote: "I talked your 
letter into a fonograf in my usual tone at my usual gait of speech. 
Then the fonograf man talked his answer in at his wonted 
swing and swell. Then we took the cylinder to a type- writer 
in the next room, and she put the hooks into her ears and wrote 
the whole out. I send you the result. There is a mistake of 
one word. I think that if you have the cheek to dictate the story 
into the fonograf, all the rest is perfectly easy. It wouldn't 
fatigue me to talk for an hour as I did." 

Clemens did not find the phonograph entirely satisfactory, 
at least not for a time, and he appears never to have used it 
steadily. His early experience with it, however, seems interesting. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, Apt. 4, *gt. 

Dear Howells, — I'm ashamed. It happened in this 
way. I was proposing to acknowledge the receipt of the 
play and the little book per phonograph, so that you could 
see that the instrument is good enough for mere letter- 
writing; then I meant to add the fact that you can't 
write literature with it, because it hasn't any ideas and it 
hasn't any gift for elaboration, or smartness of talk, or 
vigor of action, or felicity of expression, but is just matter- 
of-fact, compressive, unornamental, and as grave and 
unsmiling as the devil. 

I filled four dozen cylinders in two sittings, then found 
I could have said about as much with the pen and said 
it a deal better. Then I resigned. 

544 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I believe it could teach one to dictate literature to a 
phonographer — and some time I will experiment in that line. 

The little book is channingly written, and it interested 
me. But it flies too high for me. Its concretest things 
are filmy abstractions to me, and when I lay my grip on 
one of them and open my hand, I feel as embarrassed as 
I use to feel when I thought I had caught a fly. I'm going 
to try to mail it back to you to-day — I mean I am going 
to charge my memory. Charging my memory is one of 
my chief industries. . . . 

With our loves and our kindest regards distributed 
among you according to the proprieties. 

Yrs ever Mark. 

P. S. — I'm sending that ancient "Mental Telegraphy" 
article to Harper's — with a modest postscript. Probably 
read it to you years ago. S. L. C. 

The "little book" mentioned in this letter was by Swedenborg, 
an author in whom the Boston literary set was always deeply 
interested. "Mental Telegraphy" appeared in Harper's Maga- 
tine, and is now included in the Uniform Edition of Mark Twain's 
books. It was written in 1878. 

Joe Goodman had long since returned to California, it being 
clear that nothing could be gained by remaining in Washington. 
On receipt of the news of the type-setter's collapse he sent a 
consoling word. Perhaps he thought Clemens would rage over 
the unhappy circumstance, and possibly hold him in some 
measure to blame. But it was generally the smaller annoyances 
of life that made Mark Twain rage; the larger catastrophes 
were likely to stir only his philosophy. 

The Library of American Literature, mentioned in the follow- 
ing letter, was a work in many volumes, edited by Edmund 
Clarence Stedman and Ellen Mackay Hutchinson. 

To Joe T. Goodman: 

April (?) i8gr. 

Dear Joe, — Well, it's all right, anyway. Diplomacy 
couldn't have saved it— diplomacy of mine — at that late 

545 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



day. I hadn't any diplomacy in stock, anyway. In 
order to meet Jones's requirements I had to surrender the 
old contract (a contract which made me boss of the 
situation and gave me the whip-hand of Paige) and allow 
the new one to be drafted and put in its place. I was 
running an immense risk, but it was justified by Jones's 
promises — promises made to me not merely once but every 
time I talked with him. When February arrived, I saw 
signs which were mighty plain reading. Signs which 
meant that Paige was hoping and praying that Jones 
would go back on me — which would leave Paige boss, 
and me robbed and out in the cold. His prayers were 
answered, and I am out in the cold. If I ever get back my 
nine-twentieths interest, it will be b> law-suit — which will 
be instituted in the indefinite future, when the time 
comes. 

I am at work again — on a book. Not with a great deal 
of spirit, but with enough — yes, plenty. And I am pushing 
my publishing house. It has turned the corner after 
cleaning $50,000 a year for three consecutive years, and 
piling every cent of it into one book — Library of American 
Literature — and from next January onward it will resume 
dividends. But I've got to earn $50,000 for it between now 
and then— which £ will do if I keep my health. This 
additional capital is needed for that same book, because 
its prosperity is growing so great and exacting. 

It is dreadful to think of you in ill health — I can't 
realize it; you are always to me the same that you were 
in those days when matchless health and glowing spirits 
and delight in life were commonplaces with us. Lord 
save us all from old age and broken health and a hope- 
tree that has lost the faculty of putting out blossoms. 

With love to you both from us all. 

Mark. 

Mark Twain's residence in Hartford was drawing rapidly to 
a close. Mrs. Clemens was poorly, and his own health was un- 
certain. They believed that some of the European baths would 

546 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



help them. Furthermore, Mark Twain could no longer afford 
the luxury of his Hartford home. In Europe life could be simpler 
and vastly cheaper. He was offered a thousand dollars apiece 
for six European letters, by the McClure syndicate and W. M. 
Laffan, of the Sun. This would at least give him a start on the 
other side. The family began immediately their sad arrange- 
ments for departure. 

To Fred J. Hall {manager Chas. L. Webster & Co.), N. Y.: 

Hartford, A pi. 14, '01. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — Privately — keep it to yourself — as 
you are already aware, we are going to Europe in June, 
for an indefinite stay. We shall sell the horses and shut 
up the house. We wish to provide a place for our coach- 
man, who has been with us 2 1 years, and is sober, active, 
diligent, and unusually bright and capable. You spoke 
of hiring a colored man as engineer and helper in the 
packing room. Patrick would soon learn that trade and 
be very valuable. We will cease to need him by the middle 
or end of June. Have you made irrevocable arrangements 
with the colored man, or would you prefer to have Patrick, 
if he thinks he would like to try ? 

I have not said anything to him about it yet. 

Yours S. L. C. 

It was to be a complete breaking up of their beautiful estab- 
lishment. Patrick McAleer, George the butler, and others of 
their household help had been like members of the family. We 
may guess at the heartbreak of it all, even though the letters 
remain cheerful. 

Howells, strangely enough, seems to have been about the 
last one to be told of their European plans; in fact, he first got 
wind of it from the papers, and wrote for information. Likely 
enough Clemens had not until then had the courage to confess. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Hartford, May 20, % gt. 
Dear Howells, — For her health's sake Mrs. Clemens 
must try baths somewhere, and this it is that has deter- 

547 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



mined us to go to Europe. The water required seems to 
be provided at a little obscure and little-visited nook up 
in the hills back of the Rhine somewhere and you get to 
it by Rhine traffic-boat and country stage-coach. Come, 
get "sick or sorry enough" and join us. We shall be a 
little while at that bath, and the rest of the summer at 
Annecy (this confidential to you) in Haute Savoie, 22 
miles from Geneva. Spend the winters in Berlin. I don't 
know how long we shall be in Europe — I have a vote, 
but I don't cast it. I'm going to do whatever the others 
desire, with leave to change their mind, without preju- 
dice, whenever they want to. Travel has no longer any 
charm for me. I have seen all the foreign countries I 
want to see except heaven and hell, and I have only a 
vague curiosity as concerns one of those. 

I found I couldn't use the play — I had departed too 
far from its lines when I came to look at it. I thought I 
might get a great deal of dialogue out of it, but I got 
only 15 loosely written pages — they saved me half a days 
work. It was the cursing phonograph. There was abun- 
dance of good dialogue, but it couldn't be fitted into the 
new conditions of the story. 

Oh, look here — I did to-day what I have several times 
in past years thought of doing: answered an interviewing 
proposition from a rich newspaper with the reminder that 
they had not stated the terms; that my time was all 
occupied with writing, at good pay, and that as talking 
was harder work I should not care to venture it unless 
I knew the pay was going to be proportionately higher. 
I wish I had thought of this the other day when Charley 
Stoddard turned a pleasant Englishman loose on me and 
I couldn't think of any rational excuse. 

Ys Ever Mark. 

Clemens had finished his Sellers book and had disposed of the 
serial rights to the McClure syndicate. The house in Hartford 
was closed early in June, and on the 6th the family, with one 
maid, Katie Leary, sailed on the Gascogne. Two weeks later 

S4» 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



they had begun a residence abroad which was to last for more 
than nine years. 

It was not easy to get to work in Europe. Clemens 's arm 
remained lame, and any effort at writing brought suffering. The 
Century Magazine proposed another set of letters, but by the 
end of July he had barely begun on those promised to McClure 
and Laffan. In August, however, he was able to send three: 
one from Aix about the baths there, another from Bayreuth 
concerning the Wagner festival, and a third from Marienbad, 
in Bohemia, where they rested for a time. He decided that he 
would arrange for no more European letters when the six were 
finished, but would gather material for a book. He would take 
a courier and a kodak and go tramping again in some fashion 
that would be interesting to do and to write. 

The idea finally matured when he reached Switzerland and 
settled the family at the Hotel Beau Rivage, Ouchy, Lausanne, 
facing Lake Leman. He decided to make a floating trip down 
the Rhone, and he engaged Joseph Very, a courier that had 
served him on a former European trip, to accompany him. The 
courier went over to Bourget and bought for five dollars a flat- 
bottomed boat and engaged its owner as their pilot. It was the 
morning of September 20, when they began their floating-trip 
down the beautiful historic river that flows through the loveliest 
and most romantic region of France. He wrote daily to Mrs. 
Clemens, and his letters tell the story of that drowsy, happy 
experience better than the notes made with a view to publica- 
tion. Clemens had arrived at Lake Bourget on the evening 
before the morning of their start and slept on the Island of 
Chatillon, in an old castle of the same name. Lake Bourget 
connects with the Rhone by a small canal. 

Letters and Memoranda to Mrs. Clemens, in Ouchy, 

Switzerland: 

Sept. 20, 1891. 
Sunday, 11 a.m. 

On the lake Bourget — just started. The castle of Cha- 
tillon high overhead showing above the trees. It was a 
wonderfully still place to sleep in. Beside us there was 
nobody in it but a woman, a boy and a dog. A Pope was 
born in the room I slept in. No, he became a Pope later. 

The lake is smooth as glass— a brilliant sun is shining. 

549 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Our boat is comfortable and shady with its awning. 

1 1. 20. We have crossed the lake and are entering the 
canal. Shall presently be in the Rhone. 

Noon. Nearly down to the Rhone. Passing the village 
of Chanaz. 

j. 15 p. m. Sunday. We have been in the Rhone 3 hours. 
It is unimaginably still and reposeful and cool and soft 
and -breezy. No rowing or work of any kind to do — we 
merely float with the current — we glide noiseless and 
swift — as fast as a London cab-horse rips along — 8 miles 
an hour — the swiftest current I've ever boated in. We 
have the entire river to ourselves — nowhere a boat of any 
kind. Good bye Sweetheart 

S. L. C. 

Port de Grolee, Monday, 4.13 p.m. 

[Sept. 21, 1891] 

Name of the village which we left five minutes ago. 

We went ashore at 5 p. m. yesterday, dear heart, and 
walked a short mile to St. Geuix, a big village, and took 
quarters at the principal inn; had a good dinner and after- 
wards a long walk out of town on the banks of the Guiers 
till 7.30. 

Went to bed at 8.30 and continued to make notes and 
read books and newspapers till midnight. Slept until 8, 
breakfasted in bed, and lay till noon, because there had 
been a very heavy rain in the night and the day was still 
dark and lowering. But at noon the sun broke through 
and in 15 minutes we were tramping toward the river. 
Got afloat at 1 p. m. but at 2.40 we had to rush suddenly 
ashore and take refuge in the above village. Just as we 
got ourselves and traps safely housed in the inn, the rain 
let go and came down in great style. We lost an hour and a 
half there, but we are off again, now, with bright sunshine. 

I wrote you yesterday my darling, and shall expect to 
write you every day. 

Good-day, and love to all of you. 

Saml. 

55o 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



On thb Rhone below Villebois, 

Tuesday noon. 

Good morning, sweetheart. Night caught us yesterday 
where we had to take quarters in a peasant's house which 
was occupied by the family and a lot of cows and calves — 
also several rabbits. 1 The latter had a ball, and I was the 
ball-room; but they were very friendly and didn't bite. 

The peasants were mighty kind and hearty, and flew 
around and did their best to make us comfortable. This 
morning I breakfasted on the shore in the open air with 
two sociable dogs and a cat. Clean cloth, napkin and 
table furniture, white sugar, a vast hunk of excellent 
butter, good bread, first class coffee with pure milk, fried 
fish just caught. Wonderful that so much cleanliness 
should come out of such a phenomenally dirty house. 

An hour ago we saw the Falls of the Rhone, a prodig- 
iously rough and dangerous looking place; shipped a little 
water but came to no harm. It was one of the most beauti- 
ful pieces of piloting and boat-management I ever saw. 
Our admiral knew his business. 

We have had to run ashore for shelter every time it has 
rained heretofore, but Joseph has been putting in his odd 
time making a water-proof sun-bonnet for the boat, and 
now we sail along dry although we had many heavy 
showers this morning. 




With a word of love to you all and particularly you, 

Saml. 

i His word for fleas. 
SSI 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



On the Rhone, below Vienna. 

I salute you, my darling. Your telegram reached me 
in Lyons last night and was very pleasant news indeed. 

I was up and shaved before 8 this morning, but we got 
delayed and didn't sail from Lyons till 10.30 — an hour 
and a half lost. And we've lost another hour — two of 
them, I guess — since, by an error. We came in sight of 
Vienne at 2 o'clock, several miles ahead, on a hill, and I 
proposed to walk down there and let the boat go ahead of 
us. So Joseph and I got out and struck through a willow 
swamp along a dim path, and by and by came out on the 
steep bank of a slough or inlet or something, and we fol- 
lowed that bank forever and ever trying to get around the 
head of that slough. Finally I noticed a twig standing up 
in the water, and by George it had a distinct and even 
vigorous quiver to it! I don't know when I have felt so 
much like a donkey. On an island! I wanted to drown 
somebody, but I hadn't anybody I could spare. However, 
after another long tramp we found a lonely native, and he 
had a scow and soon we were on the mainland — yes, and 
a blamed sight further from Vienne than we were when we 
started. 

Notes — I make millions of them; and so I get no time to 
write to you. If you've got a pad there, please send it poste- 
restante to Avignon. I may not need it but I fear I shall. 

I'm straining to reach St. Pierre de Boef , but it's going 
to be a close fit, I reckon. 

Afloat, Friday, 3 p.m.; 'qi. 

Livy darling, we sailed from St. Pierre de Boef six hours 
ago, and are now approaching Tournon, where we shall not 
stop, but go on and make Valence, a city of 25,000 people. 
It's too delicious, floating with the swift current under the 
awning these superb sunshiny days in deep peace and quiet- 
ness. Some of these curious old historical towns strangely 
persuade me, but it is so lovely afloat that I don't stop, 
but view them from the outside and sail on. We get 
abundance of grapes and peaches for next to nothing. 

55* 

1 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Joseph is perfect. He is at his very best — and never 
was better in his life. I guess he gets discouraged and 
feels disliked and in the way when he is lying around — 
but here he is perfection, and brim full of useful alacrities 
and helps and ingenuities. 

When I woke up an hour ago and heard the clock strike 
4, I said u I seem to have been asleep an immensely long 
time; I must have gone to bed mighty early; I wonder 
what time I did go to bed." And I got up and lit a candle 
and looked at my watch to see. 

Afloat— 
2 Hours Below Bourc St. Andkol. 

Monday, n a.m., Sept. 28. 

Livy darling, I didn't write yesterday. We left La 
Voulte in a driving storm of cold rain — couldn't write 
in it — and at 1 p. m. when we were not thinking of stop- 
ping, we saw a picturesque and mighty ruin on a high hill 
back of a village, and I was seized with a desire to explore 
it; so we landed at once and set out with rubbers and 
umbrella, sending the boat ahead to St. Andeol, and we 
spent 3 hours clambering about those cloudy heights 
among those worn and vast and idiotic ruins of a castle 
built by two crusaders 650 years ago. The work of these 
asses was full of interest, and we had a good time inspect- 
ing, examining and scrutinizing it. All the hills on both 
sides of the Rhone have peaks and precipices, and each 
has its gray and wasted pile of mouldy walls and broken 
towers. The Romans displaced the Gauls, the Visigoths 
displaced the Romans, the Saracens displaced the Visi- 
goths, the Christians displaced the Saracens, and it was 
these pious animals who built these strange lairs and cut 
each other's throats in the name and for the glory of God, 
and robbed and burned and slew in peace and war ; and 
the pauper and the slave built churches, and the credit 
of it went to the Bishop who racked the money out of 
them. These are pathetic shores, and they make one 
despise the human race. 

553 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

We came down in an hour by rail, but I couldn't 
get your telegram till this morning, for it was Sunday 
and they had shut up the post office to go to the circus. 
I went, too. It was all one family — parents and 5 chil- 
dren — performing in the open air to 200 of these enchanted 
villagers, who contributed coppers when called on. It 
was a most gay and strange and pathetic show. I got 
up at 7 this morning to see the poor devils cook their poor 
breakfast and pack up their sordid fineries. 

This is a 9 k-m. current and the wind is with us; we 
shall make Avignon before 4 o'clock. I saw watermelons 
and pomegranates for sale at St. Andeol. 

With a power of love, Sweetheart, 

Hotel d'Europe, Avignon, 

Monday, 6 p.m., Sept. 28. 
Well, Livy darling, I have been having a perfect feast 
of letters for an hour, and I thank you and dear Clara 
with all my heart. It's like hearing from home after a 
long absence. 

It is early to be in bed, but I'm always abed before 9, 
on this voyage, and up at 7 or a trifle later, every morn- 
ing. If I ever take such a trip again, I will have myself 
called at the first tinge of dawn and get to sea as soon 
after as possible. The early dawn on the water— nothing 
can be finer, as I know by old Mississippi experience. I 
did so long for you and Sue yesterday morning — the most 
superb sunrise! — the most marvelous sunrise! and I saw 
it all — from the very faintest suspicion of the coming 
dawn all the way through to the final explosion of glory. 
But it had interest private to itself and not to be found 
elsewhere in the world; for between me and it, in the far 
distant eastward, was a silhouette mountain-range in 
which I had discovered, the previous afternoon, a most 
noble face upturned to the sky, and mighty form out- 
stretched, which I had named Napoleon Dreaming of 
Universal Empire— and now, this prodigious face, soft, 

554 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



rich, blue, spirituelle, asleep, tranquil, reposeful, lay 
against that giant conflagration of ruddy and golden splen- 
dors all rayed like a wheel with the upstreaming and far- 
reaching lances of the sun. It made one want to cry for 
delight, it was so supreme in its unimaginable majesty and 
beauty. 

We had a curious experience today. A little after I had 
sealed and directed my letter to you, in which I said we 
should make Avignon before 4, we got lost. We ceased to 
encounter any village or ruin mentioned in our "particu- 
larizes" and detailed Guide of the Rhone — went drifting 
along by the hour in a wholly unknown land and on an 
uncharted river! Confound it, we stopped talking and 
d nothing but stand up in the boat and search the hori- 
with the glass and wonder what in the devil had 
happened. And at last, away yonder at 5 o'clock when 
some vast towers and fortresses hove in sight we couldn't 
recognize them for Avignon — yet we knew by the broken 
bridge that it was Avignon. 

Then we saw what the trouble was — at some time or 
other we had drifted down the wrong side of an island and 
followed a sluggish branch of the Rhone not frequented 
in modern times. We lost an hour and a half by it and 
missed one of the most picturesque and gigantic and 
history-sodden masses of castellated medieval ruin that 
Europe can show. 

It was dark by the time we had wandered through the 
town and got the letters and found the hotel—so I went 
to bed. 

We shall leave here at noon tomorrow and float down 
to Aries, arriving about dark, and there bid good bye to 
the boat, the river-trip finished. Between Aries and 
Kimes (and Avignon again,) we shall be till Saturday 
morning — then rail it through on that day to Ouchy, 
reaching the hotel at 1 1 at night if the train isn't late. 

Next day (Sunday) if you like, go to Basel, and Monday 
to Berlin. But I shall be at your disposal, to do exactly 
as you desire and prefer. 

555 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

With no end of love to all of you and twice as much to 
you, sweetheart, Saml. 

I believe my arm is a trifle better than it was when I 
started. 

The mention in the foregoing letter of the Napoleon effigy 
is the beginning of what proved to be a rather interesting epi- 
sode. Mark Twain thought a great deal of his discovery, as 
he called it — the giant figure of Napoleon outlined by the 
distant mountain range. In his note-book he entered memo- 
randa telling just where it was to be seen, and added a- pencil 
sketch of the huge profile. But then he characteristically forgot 
all about it, and when he recalled the incident ten years later, 
he could not remember the name of the village, Beauchastel, 
from which the great figure could be seen; also, that he had 
made a record of the place. 

But he was by this time more certain than ever that his 
discovery was a remarkable one, which, if known, would be- 
come one of the great natural wonders, such as Niagara Falls. 
Theodore Stanton was visiting him at the time, and Clemens 
urged him, on his return to France, to make an excursion to the 
Rhone and locate the Lost Napoleon, as he now called it. But 
Clemens remembered the wonder as being somewhere between 
Aries and Avignon, instead of about a hundred miles above the 
last-named town. Stanton naturally failed to find it, and it 
remained for the writer of these notes, motoring up the Rhone 
one September day, exactly twenty-two years after the first 
discovery, to re-locate the vast reclining figure of the first consul 
of France, "dreaming of Universal Empire." The re-discovery 
was not difficult — with Mark Twain's memoranda as a guide — 
and it was worth while. Perhaps the Lost Napoleon is not so 
important a natural wonder as Mark Twain believed, but it 
is a striking picture, and on a clear day the calm blue face 
outlined against the sky will long hold the traveler's attention. 

To Clara Clemens, in Ouchy, Switzerland: 

Afloat, 11.20 a.m., Sept. 2g, Tuesday. 
Dear old Ben,— The vast stone masses and huge 
towers of the ancient papal palace of Avignon are pro- 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



jccted above an intervening wooded island a mile up the 
river behind me — for we are already on our way to Aries. 
It is a perfectly still morning, with a brilliant sun, and 
very hot — outside; but I am under cover of the linen 
hood, and it is cool and shady in here. 

Please tell mamma I got her very last letter this morn- 
ing, and I perceive by it that I do not need to arrive at 
Ouchy before Saturday midnight. I am glad, because I 
couldn't do the railroading I am proposing to do during 
the next two or three days and get there earlier. I could 
put in the time till Sunday midnight, but shall not venture 
it without telegraphic instructions from her to Nimes day 
after tomorrow, Oct. i, care Hotel Manivet. 

The only adventures we have is in drifting into rough 
seas now and then. They are not dangerous, but they go 
thro* all the motions of it. Yesterday when we shot the 
Bridge of the Holy Spirit it was probably in charge of 
some inexperienced deputy spirit for the day, for we 
were allowed to go through the wrong arch, which brought 
us into a tourbillon below which tried to make this old 
scow stand on its head. Of course I lost my temper and 
blew it off in a way to be heard above the roar of the 
tossing waters. I lost it because the admiral had taken 
that arch in deference to my opinion that it was the best 
one, while his own judgment told him to take the one 
nearest the other side of the river. I could have poisoned 
him I was so mad to think I had hired such a turnip. A 
boatman in command should obey nobody's orders but 
his own, and yield to nobody's suggestions. 

It was very sweet of you to write me, dear, and I thank 
you ever so much. With greatest love and kisses, 

Papa. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Ouchy, Switzerland: 

Arles, Sept. jo, noon. 
Livy darling, I hain't got no time to write today, 
because I am sight seeing industriously and imagining 
my chapter. 

557 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Bade good-bye to the river trip and gave away the 
boat yesterday evening. We had ten great days in her. 

We reached here after dark. We were due about 4.30, 
counting by distance, but we couldn't calculate on such 
a lifeless current as we found. 

I love you, sweetheart. Saml. 

It had been a long time since Clemens had written to his old 
friend Twichell, but the Rhone trip must have reminded him 
of those days thirteen years earlier, when, comparatively young 
men, he and Twichell were tramping through the Black Forest 
and scaling Gemini Pass. He sent Twichell a reminder of that 
happy time. 

To Rev. Joseph H. Twichell, in Hartford, Conn: 

Nimbs, Oct. /, *Q1. 

Dear Joe, — I have been ten days floating down the 
Rhone on a raft, from Lake Bourget, and a most curious 
and darling kind of a trip it has been. You ought to 
have been along — I could have made room for you easily 
— and you would have found that a pedestrian tour in 
Europe doesn't begin with a raft-voyage for hilarity and 
mild adventure, and intimate contact with the un visited 
native of the back settlements, and extinction from the 
world and newspapers, and a conscience in a state of 
coma, and lazy comfort, and solid happiness. In fact 
there's nothing that's so lovely. 

But it's all over. I gave the raft away yesterday at 
Aries, and am loafing along back by short stages on the 
rail to Ouchy-Lausanne where the tribe are staying. 

Love to you all — 

Mark. 

The Clemenses settled in Berlin for the winter, at 7 Kdroer- 
strasse, and later at the Hotel Royal. There had been no 
permanent improvement in Mark Twain's arm and he found 
writing difficult. Some of the letters promised to Lallan and 
McClure were still unfinished. 

SS8 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Young Hall, his publishing manager in America, was working 
hard to keep the business afloat, and being full of the optimism 
of his years did not fail to make as good a showing as he could. 
We may believe his letters were very welcome to Clemens and 
his wife, who found little enough in the general prospect to 
comfort them. 

To Mr. Hall, in New York: 

Berlin, Nov. 27, 'qi. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — That kind of a statement is valu- 
able. It came this morning. This is the first time since 
the business began that I have had a report that fur- 
nished the kind of information I wanted, and was really 
enlightening and satisfactory. Keep it up. Don't let it 
fall into desuetude. 

Everything looks so fine and handsome with the busi- 
ness, now, that I feel a great let-up from depression. The 
rewards of your long and patient industry are on their 
way, and their arrival safe in port, presently, seems 
assured. 

By George, I shall be glad when the ship comes in! 

My arm is so much better that I was able to make a 
speech last night to 250 Americans. But when they 
threw my portrait on the screen it was a sorrowful re- 
minder, for it was from a negative of 15 years ago, and 
hadn't a gray hair in it. And now that my arm is better, 
I have stolen a couple of days and finished up a couple 
of McClure letters that have been lying a long time. 

I shall mail one of them to you next Tuesday — regis- 
tered. Look out for it. 

I shall register and mail the other one (concerning the 
" Jungfrau") next Friday— look out for it also, and drop 
me a line to let me know they have arrived. 

I shall write the 6th and last letter by and by when I 
have studied Berlin sufficiently. 

Yours in a most cheerful frame of mind, and with my 
and all the family's Thanksgiving greetings and best 
wishes, S. U Clemens, 

559 



4 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Postscript by Mrs. Clemens written on Mr. Clemens 9 s 

letter: 

Dear Mr. Hall, — This is my birthday and your letter 
this morning was a happy addition to the little gifts on 
the breakfast table. I thought of going out and spending 
money for something unnecessary after it came, but con- 
cluded perhaps I better wait a little longer. 

Sincerely yours 

0. L. Clemens. 

"The German Chicago" was the last of the six McClure 
letters and was finished that winter in Berlin. It is now in- 
cluded in the Uniform Edition of Mark Twain's works, and is 
one of the best descriptive articles of the German capital ever 
written. He made no use of the Rhone notes further than to 
put them together in literary form. They did not seem to him 
to contain enough substance to warrant publication. A letter 
to Hall, written toward the end of December, we find rather 
gloomy in tone, though he is still able to extract comfort and 
even cheerfulness from one of Mr. Hall's reports. 

Memorandum to Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Among the MSS I left with you are a few that have a 
recent look and are written on rather stiff pale green 
paper. If you will have those type-writered and keep 
the originals and send me the copies (one per mail, not 
two.) I'll see if I can use them. 

But tell Howells and other inquirers that my hopes of 
writing anything are very slender — I seem to be dis- 
abled for life. 

Drop McClure a line and tell him the same. I can't 
dare to make an engagement now for even a single letter. 

I am glad Howells is on a magazine, but sorry he gave 
up the Study. I shall have to go on a magazine myself if 
this L. A. L. continues to hold my nose down to the 
grind-stone much longer. 

I'm going to hold my breath, now, for 30 days — then 

560 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the annual statement will arrive and I shall know how 
we feel! Merry Xmas to you from us all. 

Sincerely, S. L. C. 

P. S. Just finished the above and finished raging at 
the eternal German tax-gatherer, and so all the jubilant 
things which I was going to say about the past year's 
business got knocked out of me. After writing this 
present letter I was feeling blue about Huck Finn, but I 
sat down and overhauled your reports from now back to 
last April and compared them with the splendid Oct.- 
Nov. business, and went to bed feeling refreshed and fine, 
for certainly it has been a handsome year. Now rush 
me along the Annual Report and let's see how we feel ! 

S. L. C 



Digitized by 



XXXII 



LETTERS, 1892, CHIEFLY TO MR. HALL AND MRS. CRANE. 
IN BERLIN, MENTONE, BAD-NAUHEIM, FLORENCE 

MARK TWAIN was the notable literary figure in Berlin 
that winter, the center of every great gathering. He was 
entertained by the Kaiser, and shown many special attentions by 
Germans of every rank. His books were as well known in Berlin 
as in New York, and at court assemblies and embassies he was 
always a chief center of interest. 

He was too popular for his own good; the gaiety of the capital 
told on him. Finally, one night, after delivering a lecture in a 
hot room, he contracted a severe cold, driving to a ball at 
General von Versen's, and a few days later was confined to his 
bed with pneumonia. It was not a severe attack, but it was 
long continued. He could write some letters and even work a 
little, but he was not allowed to leave his bed for many weeks, 
a condition which he did not find a hardship, for no man ever 
enjoyed the loose luxury of undress and the comfort of pillows 
more than Mark Twain. In a memorandum of that time he 
wrote: "I am having a booming time all to myself." 

Meantime, Hall, in America, was sending favorable reports 
of the publishing business, and this naturally helped to keep 
up his spirits. He wrote frequently to Hall, of course, but the 
letters for the most part are purely of a business nature and of 
little interest to the general reader. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Hotel Royal, Berlin, Feb. 12. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — Daly wants to get the stage rights 
of the 1 ' American Claimant. 1 1 The foundation from which 
I wrote the story is a play of the same name which has 
been in A. P. Burbank's hands 5 or 6 years. That play 

562 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



cost me some money (helping Burbank stage it) but has 
never brought me any. I have written Burbank (Lotos 
Club) and asked him to give me back his rights in the 
old play so that I can treat with Daly and utilize this 
chance to even myself up. Burbank is a lovely fellow, 
and if he objects I can't urge him. But you run in at the 
Lotos and see him; and if he relinquishes his claim, then 
I would like you to conduct the business with Daly; or 
have Whitford or some other lawyer do it under your 
supervision if you prefer. 

This morning I seem to have rheumatism in my right foot. 

I am ordered south by the doctor and shall expect to be 
well enough to start by the end of this month. 

[No signature.) 

It is curious, after Clemens and Howells had tried so hard 
and so long to place their "Sellers" play, that now, when the 
story appeared in book form, Augustin Daly should have 
thought it worth dramatizing. Daly and Clemens were old 
friends, and it would seem that Daly could hardly have escaped 
seeing the play when it was going the rounds. But perhaps 
there is nothing more mysterious in the world than the ways and 
wants of theatrical managers. The matter came to nothing, 
of course, but the fact that Daly should have thought a story 
built from an old discarded play had a play in it seems interesting. 

Clemens and his wife were advised to leave the cold of Berlin 
as soon as he was able to travel. This was not until the first of 
March, when, taking their old courier, Joseph Very, they left 
the children in good hands and journeyed to the south of France. 

To Susy Clemens, in Berlin: 

Mentonb, March 22, '02. 

Susy dear, — I have been delighted to note your easy 
facility with your pen and proud to note also your literary 
superiorities of one kind and another— clearness of state- 
ment, directness, felicity of expression, photographic 
ability in setting forth an incident — style — good style — 
no barnacles on it in the way of unnecessary, retarding 
words (the shipman scrapes off the barnacles when he 

563 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



wants his racer to go her best gait and straight to the 
buoy.) You should write a letter every day, long or short 
— and so ought I, but I don't. 

Mamma says, tell Clara yes, she will have to write a 
note if the fan comes back mended. 

We couldn't go to Nice to-day— had to give it up, on 
various accounts— and this was the last chance. I am 
sorry for Mamma — I wish she could have gone. She 
got a heavy fall yesterday evening and was pretty stiff 
and lame this morning, but is working it off trunk packing. 

Joseph is gone to Nice to educate himself in Kodaclring 
— and to get the pictures mounted which Mamma thinks 
she took here; but I noticed she didn't take the plug out, 
as a rule. When she did, she took nine pictures on top 
of each other — composites. With lots of love. Papa. 

In the course of their Italian wanderings they reached Florence, 
where they were so comfortable and well that they decided to 
engage a villa for the next winter. Through Prof. Willard Fiske, 
they discovered the Villa Viviani, near Settignano, an old 
palace beautifully located on the hilltops east of Florence, 
commanding a wonderful view of the ancient city. Clemens 
felt that he could work there, and time proved that he was right. 

For the summer, however, they returned to Germany, and 
located at Bad-Nauheim. Clemens presently decided to make 
a trip to America to give some personal attention to business 
matters. For one thing, his publishing-house, in spite of pros- 
perity, seemed constantly to be requiring more capital, and then 
a Chicago company had been persuaded by Paige to undertake 
the manufacture of the type-setter. It was the beginning of a 
series of feverish trips which he would make back and forth 
across the ocean during the next two years. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Bad-Nauhrim, June //, '0ft. 

Saturday. 

Dear Mr. Hall— If this arrives before I do, let it 
inform you that I am leaving Bremen for New York 
next Tuesday in the "Havel." 

564 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



If you can meet me when the ship arrives, you can help 
me to get away from the reporters; and maybe you can 
take me to your own or some other lodgings where they 
can't mid me. 

But if the hour is too early or too late for you, I shall 
obscure myself somewhere till I can come to the office. 

Yours sincerely 

S. L. C 

Nothing of importance happened in America. The new 
Paige company had a factory started in Chicago and expected 
to manufacture fifty machines as a beginning. They claimed 
to have capital, or to be able to command it, and as the main 
control had passed from Ciemens's hands, he could do no more 
than look over the ground and hope for the best. As for the 
business, about all that he could do was to sign certain notes 
necessary to provide such additional capital as was needed, and 
agree with Hall that hereafter they would concentrate their 
efforts and resist further temptation in the way of new enter- 
prise. Then he returned to Bad-Nauheim and settled down to 
literature. This was the middle of July, and he must have 
worked pretty steadily, for he presently had a variety of MSS. 
ready to offer. 

To Fred J. Hall in New York: 

Aug. JO, *02. x 

Dear Mr. Hall,— I have dropped that novel I wrote 
you about, because I saw a more effective way of using 
the main episode — to wit: by telling it through the lips 
of Huck Finn. So I have started Huck Finn and Tom 
Sawyer (still 1 5 years old) and their friend the freed slave 
Jim around the world in a stray balloon, with Huck as 
narrator, and somewhere after the end of that great voyage 
he will work in the said episode and then nobody will sus- 
pect that a whole book has been written and the globe 
circumnavigated merely to get that episode in an effective 
(and at the same time apparently unintentional) way. I 
have written 12,000 words of this narrative, and find that 
the humor flows as easily as the adventures and sur- 

565 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



prises — so I shall go along and make a book of from 
50,000 to 100,000 words. 

It is a story for boys, of course, and I think will interest 
any boy between 8 years and 80. 

When I was in New York the other day Mrs. Dodge, 
editor of St. Nicholas, wrote and offered me $5,000 for 
(serial right) a story for boys 50,000 words long. I wrote 
back and declined, for I had other matter in my mind 
then. 

I conceive that the right way to write a story for boys 
is to write so that it will not only interest boys but will 
also strongly interest any man who has ever been a boy. 
That immensely enlarges the audience. 

Now this story doesn't need to be restricted to a childs 
magazine — it is proper enough for any magazine, I should 
think, or for a syndicate. I don't swear it, but I think so. 

Proposed title of the story, "New Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn." [No ^ tnn ] 

The "novel" mentioned in the foregoing was The Extraor- 
* dinary Twins, a story from which Pudd'nhcad Wilson would 
be evolved later. It was a wildly extravagant farce — just the 
sort of thing that now and then Mark Twain plunged into 
with an enthusiasm that had to work itself out and die a natural 
death, or mellow into something worth while. Tom Sawytr 
Abroad } as the new Huck story was filially called, was completed 
and disposed of to St. Nicholas for serial publication. 

The Twichells were in Europe that summer, and came to 
Bad-Nauheim. The next letter records a pleasant incident. 
The Prince of Wales of that day later became King Edward VII. 

To Mr. and Mrs. Orion Clemens, in Keokuk, Iowa.: 

Private. Bad-Nauhbim, Aug. 23, 'p*. 

Dear Orion and Mollib,— ("Private" because no 
newspaper-man or other gossip must get hold of it) 

Livy is getting along pretty well, and the doctor thinks 
another summer here will cure her. 

The Twichell's have been here four days and we have 

566 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



had good times with them. Joe and I ran over to Hom- 
burg, the great pleasure resort, Saturday, to dine with 
some friends, and in the morning I went walking in the 
promenade and met the British Ambassador to the Court 
of Berlin, and he introduced me to the Prince of Wales, 
and I found him a most unusually comfortable and unem- 
barrassing Englishman to talk with — quick to see the 
obscurest point, and equipped with a laugh which is 
spontaneous and catching. Am invited by a near friend 
of his to meet him at dinner day after tomorrow, and 
there could be a good time, but the brass band will smash 
the talk and spoil everything. 

We are expecting to move to Florence ten or twelve 
days hence, but if this hot weather continues we shall wait 
for cooler. I take Clara to Berlin for the winter— music, 
mainly, with German and French added. Thus far, 
Jean is our only glib French scholar. 

We all send love to you all and to Pamela and Sam's 
family, and Annie. Sam. 

Clemens and family left Bad-Nauheim for Italy by way of 
Switzerland. In September Mrs. Clemens 's sister, Mrs. Crane, 
who had been with them in Europe during the first year, had 
now returned to America. Mrs. Clemens had improved at the 
baths, though she had by no means recovered her health. We 
get a general report of conditions from the letter which Clemens 
wrote Mrs. Crane from Lucerne, Switzerland, where the party 
rested for several days. The "Phelps" mentioned in this letter 
was William Walter Phelps, United States Minister to Germany. 
The Phelps and Clemens families had been much associated in 
Berlin. 14 Mason " was Frank Mason, Consul General at Frank- 
fort, and in later years at Paris. "Charlie and Ida" were Charles 
flfifj Mrs. l^an^don, of £lmira. 

To Mrs. Crane, in Elmira, N. Y.: 

Lrc erne, Sept. l8 % *Q2. 

Dear Aunt Sue, — Imagine how I felt to find that you 
gone off without filling my traveling ink- 
567 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

stand which you gave me! I found it out yesterday. 
Livy advised me to write you about it. 

I have been driving this pen hard. I wrote 280 pages 
on a yarn called "Tom Sawyer Abroad," then took up 
the "Twins" again, destroyed the last half of the manu- 
script and re- wrote it in another form, and am going 
to continue it and finish it in Florence. "Tom Sawyer" 
seems rather pale to the family after the extravagances 
of the Twins, but they came to like it after they got used 
to it 

We remained in Nauheim a little too long. If we had 
left there four or five days earlier we should have made 
Florence in 3 days; but by the time we got started Livy 
had got smitten with what we feared might be erysipelas 
— greatly swollen neck and face, and unceasing head- 
aches. We lay idle in Frankfort 4 days, doctoring. We 
started Thursday and made Bale. Hard trip, because 
it was one of those trains that gets tired every seven 
minutes and stops to rest three quarters of an hour. It 
took us 3# hours to get here, instead of the regulation 
2.20. We reached here Friday evening and will leave 
to-morrow (Tuesday) morning. The rest has made the 
headaches better. We shall pull through to Milan to- 
morrow if possible. Next day we shall start at 10 a. m, 
and try to make Bologna, 5 hours. Next day (Thursday) 
Florence, D. V. Next year we will walk, for these excur- 
sions have got to be made over again. I've got seven 
trunks, and I undertook to be courier because I meant to 
express them to Florence direct, but we were a couple of 
days too late. All continental roads had issued a peremp- 
tory order that no baggage should travel a mile except 
in the company of the owner. (All over Europe people 
are howling; they are separated from their baggage and 
can't get it forwarded to them) I have to re-ship my 
trunks every day. It is very amusing — uncommonly so. 
There seemed grave doubts about our being able to get 
these trunks over the Italian frontier, but I've got a very 
handsome note from the Frankfort Italian Consul General 

568 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



addressed to all Italian Customs Officers, and we shall get 
through if anybody does. 

The Phelpses came to Frankfort and we had some 
great times — dinner at his hotel, the Masons, supper 
at our inn— Livy not in it. She was merely allowed 
a glimpse, no more. Of course, Pbelps said she was 
merely pretending to be ill; was never looking so well 
and fine 

The children are all right. They paddle around a 
little, and drive — so do we all. Lucerne seems to be pretty 
full of tourists. The Fleulen boat went out crowded 
yesterday morning. 

The Paris Herald has created a public interest by 
inoculating one of its correspondents with cholera. A 
man said yesterday he wished to God they would inocu- 
late all of them. Yes, the interest is quite general and 
strong, and much hope is felt. 

Livy says, I have said enough bad things, and better 
send all our loves to you and Charley and Ida and all the 
children and shut up. Which I do — and shut up. 

S. L. C. 

They reached Florence on the 26th, and four days later we 
find Clemens writing again to Mrs. Crane, detailing everything 
at length. Little comment on this letter is required; it fully 
explains itself. Perhaps a word of description from one of his 
memoranda will not be out of place. Of the villa he wrote: 
" It is a plain, square building, like a box, and is painted light 
green and has green window -shutters. It stands in a command- 
ing position on the artificial terrace of liberal dimensions, which 
is walled around with masonry. From the walls the vineyards 
and olive groves of the estate slant away toward the valley. . . . 
Roses overflow the retaining walls and the battered and mossy 
stone urn on the gate-post, in pink and yellow cataracts, exactly 
as they do on the drop-curtains in the theaters. The house is a 
very fortress for strength." 

The Mrs. Ross in this letter was Janet Ross, daughter of Lady 
Duff Gordon, remembered to-day for her Egyptian letters. The 
Ross castle was but a little distance away. 

569 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To Mrs. Crane, in Eltnira: 

Villa Viviani, Setttgnano, Florence. 

Sept. JO, 

Dear Sue, — We have been in the house several days, 
and certainly it is a beautiful place, — particularly at this 
moment, when the skies are a deep leaden color, the 
domes of Florence dim in the drizzling rain, and occa- 
sional perpendicular coils of lightning quivering intensely 
in the black sky about Galilee's Tower. It is a charm- 
ing panorama, and the most conspicuous towers and 
domes down in the city look to-day just as they looked 
when Boccaccio and Dante used to contemplate them from 
this hillock five and six hundred years ago. 

The Mademoiselle is a great help to Livy in the house- 
keeping, and is a cheery and cheerful presence in the 
house. The butler is equipped with a little French, and 
it is this fact that enables the house to go— but it won't 
go well until the family get some sort of facility with the 
Italian tongue, for the cook, the woman-of-all-work and 
the coachman understand only that. It is a stubborn 
and devilish language to learn, but Jean and the others 
will master it. Livy's German Nauheim girl is the worst 
off of anybody, as there is no market for her tongue at all 
among the help. 

With the furniture in and the curtains up the house is 
very pretty, and not unhomelike. At mid-night last 
night we heard screams up stairs— Susy had set the 
lofty window curtains afire with a candle. This sounds 
kind of frightful, whereas when you come to think of it, 
a burning curtain or pile of furniture hasn't any ele- 
ment of danger about it in this fortress. There isn't 
any conceivable way to burn this house down, or 
enable a conflagration on one floor to climb to the 
next. 

Mrs. Ross laid in our wood, wine and servants for us, 
and they are excellent. She had the house scoured from 
cellar to roof, the curtains washed and put up, all beds 

57o 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



pulled to pieces, beaten, washed and put together again, 
and beguiled the Marchese into putting a big por- 
celain stove in the vast central hall. She is a wonderful 
woman, and we don't quite see how or when we should 
have gotten under way without her. 

Observe our address above — the post delivers letters 
daily at the house. 

Even with the work and fuss of settling the house Livy 
has improved— and the best is yet to come. There is 
going to be absolute seclusion here — a hermit life, in fact. 
We (the rest of us) shall run over to the Ross's frequently, 
and they will come here now and then and see Livy — that 
is all. Mr. Fiske is away — nobody knows where — and 
the work on his house has been stopped and his servants 
discharged. Therefore we shall merely go Rossing — as 
far as society is concerned — shan't circulate in Florence 
until Livy shall be well enough to take a share in it. 

This present house is modern. It is not much more 
than two centuries old ; but parts of it, and also its founda- 
tions are of high antiquity. The fine beautiful family 
portraits — the great carved ones in the large ovals over 
the doors of the big hall — cany one well back into the 
past. One of them is dated 1305 — he could have known 
Dante, you see. Another is dated 1343 — he could have 
known Boccaccio and spent his afternoons in Fiesoie lis- 
tening to the Decameron tales. Another is dated 1463— 
he could have met Columbus. . . . 

Evening. The storm thundered away until night, and 
the rain came down in floods. For awhile there was a 
partial break, which furnished about such a sunset as 
will be exhibited when the Last Day comes and the 
universe tumbles together in wreck and nun. I have 
never seen anything more spectacular and impressive. 

One person is satisfied with the villa, anyway. Jean 
prefers it to all Europe, save Venice. Jean is eager to 
get at the Italian tongue again, now, and I see that she 
has forgotten little or nothing of what she learned of it in 
Rome and Venice last spring. 

S7i 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I am the head French duffer of the family. Most of the 
talk goes over my head at the table. I catch only words, 
not phrases. When Italian comes to be substituted I shall 
be even worse off than I am now, I suppose. 

This reminds me that this evening the German girl said 
to Livy, "Man hat mir gesagt dass Sie una candella 
verlaught habe" — unconsciously dropping in a couple of 
Italian words, you see. So she is going to join the poly- 
glots, too, it appears. They say it is good entertainment 
to hear her and the butler talk together in their respective 
tongues, piecing out and patching up with the universal 
sign-language as they go along. Five languages in use 
in the house (including the sign-language — hardest-worked 
of them all) and yet with all this opulence of resource we 
do seem to have an uncommonly tough time making our- 
selves understood. 

What we lack is a cat. If we only had Gennania! 
That was the most satisfactory all-round cat I have seen 
yet. Totally ungermanic in the raciness of his character 
and in the sparkle of his mind and the spontaneity of his 
movements. We shall not look upon his like again. . . . 

S. L. C. 

Clemens got well settled down to work presently. He found 
the situation, the climate, the background, entirely suited to 
literary production, and in a little while he had accomplished 
more than at any other time since his arrival in Europe. From 
letters to Mrs. Crane and to Mr. Hall we learn something of his 
employments and his satisfaction. 

To Mrs. Cram, in Elmira: 

Villa Viviani 
Settignano, Florence. 

Oct. 22, *Q2. 

Dear Sue,— We are getting wonted. The open fires 
have driven away the cold and the doubt, and now a cheery 
spirit pervades the place. Livy and the Kings and Made- 
moiselle having been taking their tea a number of times, 

572 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



lately, on the open terrace with the city and the hills and 
the sunset for company. I stop work, a few minutes, as a 
rule, when the sun gets down to the hilltops west of 
Florence, and join the tea-group to wonder and exclaim. 
There is always some new miracle in the view, a new and 
exquisite variation in the show, a variation which occurs 
every 15 minutes between dawn and night. Once early 
in the morning, a multitude of white villas not before per- 
ceived, revealed themselves on the far hills ; then we recog- 
nized that all those great hills are snowed thick with them, 
clear to the summit. 

The variety of lovely effects, the infinitude of change, 
is something not to be believed by any who has not seen 
it. No view that I am acquainted with in the world is at 
all comparable to this for delicacy, charm, exquisiteness, 
dainty coloring, and bewildering rapidity of change. It 
keeps a person drunk with pleasure all the time. Sometimes 
Florence ceases to be substantial, and becomes just a faint 
soft dream, with domes and towers of air, and one is per- 
suaded that he might blow it away with a puff of his 
breath. 

Livy is progressing admirably. This is just the place 
for her. [Remainder missing.] 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Dec. 12, '02. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — November check received. 

I have lent the Californian's Story to Arthur S ted man 
for his Author Club Book, so your suggestion that my 
new spring-book bear that name arrives too late, as he 
probably would not want us to use that story in a book 
of ours until the Author book had had its run. That is 
for him to decide — and I don't want him hampered at all 
in his decision. I, for my part, prefer the M £1,000,000 
Banknote and Other Stories" by Mark Twain as a title, 
but above my judgment I prefer yours. I mean this— it 
is not taffy. 

M 573 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I told Arthur to leave out the former squib or paragraph 
and use only the Californian's Story. Tell him this is 
because I am going to use that in the book I am now 
writing. 

I finished "Those Extraordinary Twins" night before 
last — makes 60 or 80,000 words — haven't counted. 

The last third of it suits me to a dot. I begin, to-day t 
to entirely re-cast and re-write the first two-thirds — new 
plan, with two minor characters, made very prominent, 
one major character cropped out, and the Twins subor- 
dinated to a minor but not insignificant place. 

The minor character will now become the chiefest, and 
I will name the story after him — " Puddn'head Wilson" 

Merry Xmas to you, and great prosperity and felicity! 

S. L. Clemens. 



Digitized by Google 



LETTERS, 1893, TO HK- HALL, MRS. CLEMENS, AND OTHERS. 
FLORENCE. BUSINESS TROUBLES. " PUDD'NHEAD 
WILSON." "JOAN OF ARC." AT THE 
PLAYERS, NEW YORK 

P[E reader may have suspected that young Mr. Hall in 
New York was having his troubles. He was by this time 
one-third owner in the business of Charles L. Webster & Co., 
as well as its general manager. The business had been drained 
of its capital one way and another— partly by the publication of 
unprofitable books; partly by the earlier demands of the type- 
setter, but more than all by the manufacturing cost and agents' 
commissions demanded by L. A. L.; that is to say, the eleven 
large volumes constituting the Library of American Literature, 
which Webster had undertaken to place in a million American 
homes. There was plenty of sale for it — indeed, that was just 
the trouble; for it was sold on payments — small monthly pay- 
ments — while the cost of manufacture and the liberal agents' 
commissions were cash items, and it would require a consider- 
able period before the dribble of collections would swell into a 
tide large enough to satisfy the steady outflow of expense. A 
sale of twenty-five sets a day meant prosperity on paper, but 
unless capital could be raised from some other source to make 
and market those books through a period of months, perhaps 
even years, to come, it meant bankruptcy in reality. It was 
Halls job, with Clemens to back him, to keep their ship afloat 
on these steadily ebbing financial waters. It was also Hall's 
affair to keep Mark Twain cheerful, to look pleasant himself, 
and to show how they were steadily getting rich because orders 
were pouring in, though a cloud that resembled bankruptcy 
loomed always a little higher upon the horizon. If Hall had not 
been young and an optimist, he would have been frightened out 
of his boots early in the game. As it was, he made a brave 

575 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



steady fight, kept as cheerful and stiff an upper Hp as possible, 
always hoping that something would happen — some grand sale 
of his other books, some unexpected inflow from the type-setter 
interests — anything that would sustain his ship until the L. A 
L. tide should turn and float it into safety. 

Clemens had faith in Hall and was fond of him. He never 
found fault with him; he tried to accept his encouraging r eports 
at their face value. He lent the firm every dollar of his literary 
earnings not absolutely needed for the family's support; he 
signed new notes; he allowed Mrs. Clemens to put in such 
remnants of her patrimony as the type-setter had spared. 

The situation in 1893 was about as here outlined. The letters 
to Hall of that year are frequent and carry along the story. To 
any who had formed the idea that Mark Twain was irascible, 
exacting, and faultfinding, they will perhaps be a revelation. 

To Fred J. Hall in New York: 

Florence, Jan. /, f gj. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — Yours of Dec. 19 is to hand, and 
Mrs. Clemens is deeply distressed, for she thinks I have 
been blaming you or finding fault with you about some- 
thing. But most surely that cannot be. I tell her that 
although I am prone to write hasty and regrettable things 
to other people, I am not a bit likely to write such things 
to you. I can't believe I have done anything so ungrateful. 
If I have, pile coals of fire on my head, for I deserve it ! 

I wonder if my letter of credit isn't an encumbrance? 
Do you have to deposit the whole amount it calls for? 
If that is so, it is an encumbrance, and we must withdraw 
it and take the money out of soak. I have never made 
drafts upon it except when compelled, because I thought 
you deposited nothing against it, and only had to put up 
money that I drew upon it ; that therefore the less I drew 
the easier it would be for you. 

I am dreadfully sorry I didn't know it would be a help 
to you to let my monthly check pass over a couple of 
months. I could have stood that by drawing what is left 
of Mrs. Clemens's letter of credit, and we would have 
done it cheerfully. 

576 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I will write Whitmore to send you the 44 Century** 
check for $1,000, and you can collect Mrs. Dodge's $2,000 
(Whitmore has power of attorney which I think will 
enable him to endorse it over to vou in mv name.) If 
you need that $3,000 put it in the business and use it, 
and send Whitmore the Company's note for a year. If 
you don't need it, turn it over to Mr. Halsey and let him 
invest it for me. 

I've a mighty poor financial head, and I may be all 
wrong — but tell me if I am wrong in supposing that in 
lending my own firm money at 6 per cent I pay 4 of it 
myself and so really get only 2 per cent? Now don't 
laugh if that is stupid. 

Of course my friend declined to buy a quarter interest 
in the L. A. L. for $200,000. I judged he would. I 
hoped he would offer $100,000, but he didn't. If the 
cholera breaks out in America a few months hence, we 
can't borrow or sell; but if it doesn't we must try hard 
to raise $100,000. I wish we could do it before there is a 
cholera scare. 

I have been in bed two or three days with a cold, but 
I got up an hour ago, and I believe I am all right again. 

How I wish I had appreciated the need of $100,000 
when I was in New York last summer ! I would have tried 
my best to raise it. It would make us able to stand 1 ,000 
sets of L. A. L. per month, but not any more, I guess. 

You have done magnificently with the business, and 
we must raise the money somehow, to enable you to reap 
the reward of all that labor. 

Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

44 Whitmore," in this letter, was P. G. Whitmore, of Hartford, 
Mark Twain's financial agent. The money due from Mrs. 
Dodge was a balance on Tom Sawyer Abroad, which had been 
accepted by St. Nicholas. Mr. Halsey was a down-town broker. 

Clemens, who was growing weary of the constant demands of 
L. A. L., had conceived the idea that it would be well to dispose 
of a portion of it for enough cash to finance its manufacture. 

577 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



We don't know who the friend was to whom he offered a quarter 
interest for the modest sum of two hundred thousand dollars. 
But in the next letter we discover designs on a certain very 
canny Scotchman of Skibo. 

To Fred J. Hall in New York: 

Florence, Jan. 28. '92. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — I want to throw out a suggestion 
and see what you think of it. We have a good start, and 
solid ground under us; we have a valuable reputation; 
our business organization is practical, sound and well- 
devised; our publications are of a respect-worthy char- 
acter and of a money-breeding species. Now then I 
think that the association with us of some one of great 
name and with capital would give our business a prodigious 
impetus — that phrase is not too strong. 

As I look at it, it is not money merely that is needed ; 
if that were all, the firm has friends enough who would 
take an interest in a paying venture; we need some one 
who has made his life a success not only from a business 
standpoint, but with that achievement back of him, has 
been great enough to make his power felt as a thinker 
and a literary man. It is a pretty usual thing for pub- 
lishers to have this sort of partners. Now you see what a 
power Carnegie is, and how far his voice reaches in the 
several lines I speak of. Do you know him? You do by 
correspondence or purely business talks about his books — 
but personally, I mean? so that it would not be an intru- 
sion for you to speak to him about this desire of mine — 
for I would like you to put it before him, and if you fail 
to interest him in it, you will probably get at least some 
valuable suggestions from him. I'll enclose a note of 
introduction—you needn't use it if you don't need to. 

Yours S. L. C. 

P. 5. Yes, I think I have already acknowledged the Dee 
$1,000 and the Jan. $500 — and if another $500 was mailed 
3 days ago there's no hiatus. 
I think I also reminded you that the new letter of credit 

578 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



does not cover the unexpended balance of the old one but 
falls considerably short of it. 

Do your best with Carnegie, and don't wait to consider 
any of my intermediate suggestions or talks about our 
raising half of the $200,000 ourselves. I mean, wait for 
nothing. To make my suggestion available I should have 
to go over and see Arnot, and I don't want to until I can 
mention Carnegie's name to him as going in with us. 

My book is type-written and ready for print — M Pudd'n- 
head Wilson— a Tale." (Or, "Those Extraordinary 
Twins," if preferable.) 

It makes 82,500 words — 12,000 more than Huck Finn. 
But I don't know what to do with it. Mrs. Clemens 
thinks it wouldn't do to go to the Am. Pub. Co. or any- 
where outside of our own house; we have no subscription 
machinery, and a book in the trade is a book thrown away, 
as far as money-profit goes. I am in a quandary. Give 
me a lift out of it. 

I will mail the book to you and get you to examine it 
and see if it is good or if it is bad. I think it is good, and 
I thought the Claimant bad, when I saw it in print; but 
as for real judgment, I think I am destitute of it. 

I am writing a companion to the Prince and Pauper, 
which is half done and will make 200,000 words; and I 
have had the idea that if it were gotten up in handsome 
style, with many illustrations and put at a high enough 
price maybe the L. A. L. canvassers would take it and 
run it with that book. Would they? It could be priced 
anywhere from $4 up to $10, according to how it was 
gotten up, I suppose. 

I don't want it to go into a magazine. S L C 

I am having several short things type-"wntered." I 
will send them to you presently. I like the Century and 
Harper's, but I don't know that I have any business to 
object to the Cosmopolitan if they pay as good rates. I sup- 
pose a man ought to stick to one magazine, but that may 
be only superstition. What do you think ? S. L. C. 

579 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



"The companion to The Prince and the Pauper," mentioned in 
this letter, was the story of Joan of Arc, perhaps the most fin- 
ished of Mark Twain's literary productions. His interest 
in Joan had been first awakened when, as a printer's apprentice 
in Hannibal, he had found blowing along the street a stray leaf 
from some printed story of her life. That fragment of history 
had pictured Joan in prison, insulted and mistreated by ruffians. 
It had aroused all the sympathy and indignation in the boy, 
Sam Clemens; also, it had awakened his interest in history, and. 
indeed, in all literature. 

His love for the character of Joan had grown with the years, 
until in time he had conceived the idea of writing her story. 
As far back as the early eighties he had collected material for 
it, and had begun to make the notes. One thing and another 
had interfered, and he had found no opportunity for such a 
story. Now, however, in Florence, in the ancient villa, and in 
the quiet garden, looking across the vineyards and olive groves 
to the dream city along the Arno, he felt moved to take up the 
tale of the shepherd girl of France, the soldier maid, or, as he 
called her, "The noble child, the most innocent, the most lovely, 
the most adorable the ages have produced." His surroundings 
and background would seem to have been perfect, and he must 
have written with considerable ease to have completed a hundred 
thousand words in a period of not more than six weeks. 

Perhaps Hall did not even go to see Carnegie; at all events 
nothing seems to have come of the idea. Once, at a later time, 
Mark Twain himself mentioned the matter to Carnegie, and sug- 
gested to him that it was poor financiering to put all of one's 
eggs into one basket, meaning into iron. But Carnegie answered, 
"That's a mistake; put all your eggs into one basket and watch 
that basket." 

It was March when Clemens felt that once more his presence 
was demanded in America. He must see if anything could be 
realized from the type-setter or L. A. L. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

March jj, 

Dear Mr. Hall,— I am busy getting ready to sail the 
2 2d, in the Kaiser Wilhelm II. 
I send herewith 2 magazine articles. 
The Story contains 3,800 to 4,000 words. 

580 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The "Diary" contains 3,800 words. 

Each would make about 4 pages of the Century. 

The Diary is a gem, HI do say it myself that shouldn't. 

If the Cosmopolitan wishes to pay $600 for either of them 
or $1,200 for both, gather in the check, and I will use the 
money in America instead of breaking into your treasury. 

If they don't wish to trade for either, send the articles 
to the Century, without naming a price, and if their check 
isn't large enough I will call and abuse them when I come. 

I signed and mailed the notes yesterday. 

Yours S. L. C. 

Clemens reached New York on the 3d of April and made a 
trip to Chicago, but accomplished nothing, except to visit the 
World's Fair and be laid up with a severe cold. The machine 
situation had not progressed. The financial stringency of 1893 
had brought everything to a standstill. The New York bank 
would advance Webster & Co. no more money. So disturbed 
were his affairs, so disordered was everything, that sometimes 
he felt himself as one walking amid unrealities. A fragment of 
a letter to Mrs. Crane conveys this: 

14 1 dreamed I was born and grew up and was a pilot on the 
Mississippi and a miner and a journalist in Nevada and a pil- 
grim in the Quaker City, and had a wife and children and went 
to live in a villa at Florence — and this dream goes on and on 
and sometimes seems so real that I almost believe it is real. I 
wonder if it is? But there is no way to tell, for if one applies 
tests they would be part of the dream, too, and so would simply 
aid the deceit. I wish I knew whether it is a dream or real." 

He saw Warner, briefly, in America; also Howells, now living 
in New York, but he had little time for visiting. On May 13th 
he sailed again for Europe on the Kaiser Wilhclm II. On the 
night before sailing he sent Howells a good -by word. 

To W. D. Howells y in New York City: 
Murray Hill Hotel, New York, May 12, 1893. 

Dear Howells,— I am so sorry I missed you. 
I am very glad to have that book for sea entertainment, 
and I thank you ever so much for it. 

S 8i 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I've had a little visit with Warner at last; I was getting 
afraid I wasn't going to have a chance to see him at all. 
I forgot to tell you how thoroughly I enjoyed your account 
of the country printing office, and how true it all was and 
how intimately recognizable in all its details. But Warner 
was full of delight over it, and that reminded me, and I 
am glad, for I wanted to speak of it. 

You have given me a book; Annie Trumbull has sent 
me her book; I bought a couple of books; Mr. Hall gave 
me a choice German book; Laffan gave me two bottles 
of whisky and a box of cigars — I go to sea nobly equipped. 

Good-bye and all good fortune attend you and yours — 
and upon you all I leave my benediction. 

Mark. 

Mention has already been made of the Ross home being very 
near to Viviani, and the association of the Ross and Clemens 
families. There was a fine vegetable garden on the Ross 
estate, and it was in the interest of it that the next letter was 
written to the Secretary of Agriculture. 

To Hon, J. Sterling Morton, in Washington, D. C: 

Editorial Department Century Magazine, 
Union Square, 

New York, April 6, 1803. 

To the Hon. J. Sterling Morton,— Dear Sir: Your 
petitioner, Mark Twain, a poor farmer of Connecticut — 
indeed, the poorest one there, in the opinion of many — 
desires a few choice breeds of seed corn (maize), and in 
return will zealously support the Administration in all ways 
honorable and otherwise. 

To speak by the card, I want these things to hurry to 
Italy to an English lady. She is a neighbor of mine out- 
side of Florence, and has a great garden and thinks she 
could raise corn for her table if she had the right ammuni- 
tion. I myself feel a warm interest in this enterprise, 
both on patriotic grounds and because I have a key to that 

582 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



garden, which I got made from a wax impression. It is 
not very good soil, still I think she can grow enough for 
one table and I am in a position to select the table. If you 
are willing to aid and abet a countryman (and Gilder 
thinks you are,) please find the signature and address of 
your petitioner below. 
Respectfully and truly yours. 

Mark Twain, 
67 Fifth Avenue, New York. 

P. S.— A handful of choice (Southern) watermelon 
seeds would pleasantly add to that lady's employments 
and give my table a corresponding lift. 

His idea of business values had moderated considerably by 
the time he had returned to Florence. He was not hopeless 
yet, but he was clearly a good deal disheartened — anxious for 
freedom. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Florence May jo, '93 

Dear Mr. Hall, — You were to cable me if you sold 
any machine royalties — so I judge you have not succeeded. 

This has depressed me. I have been looking over the 
past year's letters and statements and am depressed still 
more, 

I am terribly tired of business. I am by nature and 
disposition unfitted for it and I want to get out of it. I 
am standing on the Mount Morris volcano with help 
from the machine a long way off — doubtless a long way 
further off than the Connecticut Co. imagines. 

Now here is my idea for getting out. 

The firm owes Mrs. Clemens and me — I do not know 
quite how much, but it is about $170,000 or $175,000, I 
suppose (I make this guess from the documents here, 
whose technicalities confuse me horribly ) 

The firm owes other sums, but there is st/xk and cah 
assets to cover the entire indebtedness and $116,679,20 

5*3 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



over. Is that it? In addition we have the L. A. L. 
plates and copyright, worth more than $130,000 — is 
that correct? 

That is to say, we have property worth about $250,000 
above indebtedness, I suppose — or, by one of your esti- 
mates, $300,000? The greater part of the first debts to 
me is in notes paying 6 percent. The rest (the old $70,000 
or whatever it is) pays no interest. 

Now then, will Harper or Apple ton, or Putnam give 
me $200,000 for those debts and my two-thirds interest 
in the firm? (The firm of course taking the Mount Morris 
and all such obligations off my hands and leaving me clear 
of all responsibility.) 

I don't want much money. I only want first class 
notes — $200,000 worth of them at 6 per cent, payable 
monthly; — yearly notes, renewable annually for 3 years, 
with $5,000 of the principal payable at the beginning 
and middle of each year. After that, the notes renewable 
annually and (perhaps) a larger part of the principal 
payable semi-annually. 

Please advise me and suggest alterations and emenda- 
tions of the above scheme, for I need that sort of help, 
being ignorant of business and not able to learn a single 
detail of it. 

Such a deal would make it easy for a big firm to pour 
in a big cash capital and jump L. A. L. up to enormous 
prosperity. Then your one-third would be a fortune — 
and I hope to see that day! 

I enclose an authority to use with Whitmore in case 
you have sold any royalties. But if you can't make this 
deal don't make any. Wait a little and see if you can't 
make the deal. Do make the deal if you possibly can. 
And if any presence shall be necessary in order to complete 
it I will come over, though I hope it can be done without 
that. 

Get me out of business! 

And I will be yours forever gratefully, 

S. L. Clemens 

584 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



My idea is, that I am offering my H of L. A. L. and the 
business for thirty or forty thousand dollars. Is that it? 

P. S. S. The new firm could retain my books and reduce 
them to a 10 percent royalty. S. L. C. 

To Rev. Jos. H. TwicheU, in Hartford: 

Villa Viviani, Settignano (Florence) 

June p, '93. 

Dear Joe, — The sea voyage set me up and I reached 
here May 27 in tolerable condition—nothing left but 
weakness, cough all gone. 

Old Sir Henry Layard was here the other day, visit- 
ing our neighbor Janet Ross, daughter of Lady Duff 
Gordon, and since then I have been reading his account 
of the adventures of his youth in the far East. In a 
footnote he has something to say about a sailor which I 
thought might interest you — viz: 

"This same quartermaster was celebrated among the 
English in Mesopotamia for an entry which he made in 
his log-book— after a perilous storm; 'The windy and 
watery elements raged. Tears and prayers was had re- 
course to, but was of no manner of use. So we hauled up 
the anchor and got round the point.' M 

There — it isn't Ned Wakeman; it was before his day. 
With love, Mark. 

They closed Villa Viviani in June and near the end of the 
month arrived in Munich in order that Mrs. Clemens might 
visit some of the German baths. The next letter is written by 
her and shows her deep sympathy with Hall in his desperate 
struggle. There have been few more unselfish and courageous 
women in history than Mark Twain's wife. 

From Mrs. Clemens to Mr. Hall, in New York: 

June 27th 1893 
Munich. 

Dear Mr. Hall,— Your letter to Mr. Clemens of June 
1 6th has just reached here; as he has gone to Berlin for 
Clara I am going to send you just a line in answer to it, 

5«S 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Mr. Clemens did not realize what trouble you would be 
in when his letter should reach you or he would not have 
sent it just then. I hope you will not worry any more 
than you can help. Do not let our interests weigh on you 
too heavily. We both know you will, as you always have, 
look in every way to the best interests of all. 

I think Mr. Clemens is right in feeling that he should 
get out of business, that he is not fitted for it; it worries 
him too much. 

But he need be in no haste about it, and of course, it 
would be the very farthest from his desire to imperil, in 
the slightest degree, your interests in order to save his 
own. 

I am sure that I voice his wish as well as mine when I 
say that he would simply like you to bear in mind the 
fact that he greatly desires to be released from his present 
anxiety and worry, at a time when it shall not endanger your 
interest or the safety of the business. 

I am more sorry than I can express that this letter of 
Mr. Clemens' should have reached you when you were 
struggling under such terrible pressure. I hope now that 
the weight is not quite so heavy. He would not have 
written you about the money if he had known that it 
was an inconvenience for you to send it. He thought 
the book-keeper whose duty it is to forward it had for- 
gotten. 

We can draw on Mr. Langdon for money for a few 
weeks until things are a little easier with you. As Mr. 
Clemens wrote you we would say "do not send us any 
more money at present" if we were not afraid to do 
so. I will say, however, do not trouble yourself if 
for a few weeks you are not able to send the usual 
amount. 

Mr. Clemens and I have the greatest possible desire, 
not to increase in any way your burdens, and sincerely 
wish we might aid you. 

I trust my brother may be able, in his talk with you, 
to throw some helpful light on the situation. 

586 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Hoping you will see a change for the better and begin 
to reap the fruit of your long and hard labor. 

Believe me 

Very Cordially yours 

Olivia L. Clemens. 

Hall, naturally, did not wish to be left alone with the business. 
He realized that his credit would suffer, both at the bank and 
with the public, if his distinguished partner should retire. He 
wrote, therefore, proposing as an alternate that they dispose of 
the big subscription set that was swamping them. It was a 
good plan— if it would work— and we find Clemens entering 
into it heartily. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Munich, July j, 'pj. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — You make a suggestion which has 
once or twice flitted dimly through my mind heretofore: 
to wit, sell L. A. L. 

I like that better than the other scheme, for it is no 
doubt feasible, whereas the other is perhaps not. 

The firm is in debt, but L A. L. is free — and not only 
free but has large money owing to it. A proposition to 
sell that by itself to a big house could be made without 
embarrassment — we merely confess that we cannot spare 
capital from the rest of the business to run it on the huge 
scale necessary to make it an opulent success. 

It will be selling a good thing — for somebody; and it 
will be getting rid of a load which we are clearly not able 
to carry Whoever buys will have a noble good opening — 
a complete equipment, a well organized business, a capable 
and experienced manaccr. and enterprise not experimental 
but under full sail, and immediately able to pay 50 per 
cent a year on every dollar the publisher shall actually 
invest in it — I mean in making and selling the books. 

I am miserably sorry to be adding bothers and torments to 
the over-supply which you already have in these hideous 
times, but I feel so troubled, myself, considering the dreary 

587 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

fact that we are getting deeper and deeper in debt and the 
L. A. L. getting to be a heavier and heavier burden all the 
time, that I must bestir myself and seek a way of relief. 

It did not occur to me that in selling out I would injure 
you — for that I am not going to do. But to sell L. A. L. 
will not injure you— it will put you in better shape. 

Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemons. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

July 8. % 02. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — I am sincerely glad you are going to 
sell L. A. L. I am glad you are shutting off the agents, 
and I hope the fatal book will be out of our hands before 
it will be time to put them on again. With nothing but 
our non-existent capital to work with the book has no 
value for us, rich a prize as it will be to any competent 
house that gets it. 

I hope you are making an effort to sell before you 
discharge too many agents, for I suppose the agents are a 
valuable part of the property. 

We have been stopping in Munich for awhile, but we 
shall make a break for some country resort in a few days 
now. Sincerely Yours S. L. C. 

July 8 

P. S. No, I suppose I am wrong in suggesting that you 
wait a moment before discharging your L. A. L. agents — 
in fact I didn't mean that. I judge your only hope of sal- 
vation is in discharging them all at once, since it is their 
commissions that threaten to swamp us. It is they who 
have eaten up the $14,000 I left with you in such a brief 
time, no doubt. 

I feel panicky. 

I think the sale might be made with better advantage, 
however, now, than later when the agents have got out 
of the purchaser's reach. S. L. C. 

P. S. No monthly report for many months. 

588 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Those who are old enough to remember the summer of 1893 
may recall it as a black financial season. Banks were denying 
credit, businesses were forced to the wall. It was a poor time 
to float any costly enterprise. The Chicago company who was 
trying to build the machines made little progress. The book 
business everywhere was bad. In a brief note following the 
foregoing letters Clemens wrote Hall: 

u It is now past the middle of July and no cablegram to say 
the machine is finished. We are afraid you are having miser- 
able days and worried nights, and we sincerely wish we could 
relieve you, but it is all black with us and we don't know any 
helpful thing to say or do." 

He inclosed some kind of manuscript proposition for John Bris- 
ben Walker, of the Cosmopolitan, with the comment: 44 It is my 
ingenious scheme to protect the family against the alms-house 
for one more year— and after that— well, goodness knows! I 
have never felt so desperate in my life— and good reason, for I 
haven't got a penny to my name, and Mrs. Clemens hasn't 
enough laid up with Langdon to keep us two months." 

It was like Mark Twain, in the midst of all this turmoil, to 
project an entirely new enterprise; his busy mind was always 
visioning success in unusual undertakings, regardless of im- 
mediate conditions and the steps necessary to achievement. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

July 26 \ '03. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — . . . I hope the machine will be 
finished this month; but it took me four years and cost 
me Si 00,000 to finish the other machine after it was 
apparently entirely complete and setting type like a 
house-afire. 

I wonder what they call 14 finished." After it is absolutely 
perfect it can't go into a printing-office until it has had a 
month's wear, running night and day, to get the bearings 
smooth, I judge. 

I may be able to run over about mid-October. Then 
if I find you relieved of L. A. L. we will start a magazine 
—inexpensive, and of an entirely unique sort. Arthur 
Stedman and his father editors of it. Arthur could do 

iL— 10 589 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



all the work, merely submitting it to his father for 
approval. 

The first number should pay — and all subsequent ones 
— 25 cents a number. Cost of first number (20,000 copies) 
$2,000. Give most of them away, sell the rest. Adver- 
tising and other expenses — cost unknown. Send one to 
all newspapers — it would get a notice — favorable, too. 

But we cannot undertake it until L. A. L. is out of the 
way. With our hands free and some capital to spare, we 
could make it hum. 



Where is the Shelley article? If you have it on hand, 
keep it and I will presently tell you what to do with it. 
Don't forget to tell me. 



The Shelley article mentioned in this letter was the " Defense 
of Harriet Shelley," one of the very best of his essays. How 
he could have written this splendid paper at a time of such dis- 
traction passes comprehension. Furthermore, it is clear that 
he had revised, indeed rewritten, the long story of Pudd'nkead 
W ilson. 



Dear Mr. Hall, — This time "Pudd'nhead Wilson" is 
a success! Even Mrs. Clemens, the most difficult of 
critics, confesses it, and without reserves or qualifica- 
tions. Formerly she would not consent that it be pub- 
lished either before or after my death. I bave pulled the 
twins apart and made two individuals of them; I have 
sunk them out of sight, they are mere flitting shadows, 
now, and of no importance; their story has disappeared 
from the book. Aunt Betsy Hale has vanished wholly, 
leaving not a trace behind; aunt Patsy Cooper and her 
daughter Rowena have almost disappeared — they scarcely 
walk across the stage. The whole story is centered on the 
murder and the trial; from the first chapter the move- 



Yours Sincerely 



S. L. C. 



To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 



July 30. 



590 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ment is straight ahead without divergence or side-play 
to the murder and the trial; everything that is done or 
said or that happens is a preparation for those events. 
Therefore, 3 people stand up high, from beginning to end, 
and only 3 — Pudd'nhead, "Tom" Driscoll, and his nigger 
mother, Roxana; none of the others are important, or 
get in the way of the story or require the reader's atten- 
tion. Consequently, the scenes and episodes which were 
the strength of the book formerly are stronger than ever, 
now. 

When I began this final reconstruction the story con- 
tained 81,500 words, now it contains only 58,000. I have 
knocked out everything that delayed the march of the 
story — even the description of a Mississippi steamboat. 
There's no weather in, and no scenery — the story is 
stripped for flight ! 

Now, then what is she worth? The amount of matter 
is but 3,000 words short of the American Claimant, for 
which the syndicate paid $12,500. There was nothing 
new in that story, but the finger-prints in this one is 
virgin ground—absolutely fresh, and mighty curious and 
interesting to every body. 

I don't want any more syndicating — nothing short of 
$20,000, anyway, and that I can't get — but won't you see 
how much the Cosmopolitan will stand? 

Do your best for me, for I do not sleep these nights, for 
visions of the poor-house. 

This in spite of the hopeful tone of yours of nth to 
Langdon (just received) for in me hope is very nearly 
expiring. Everything does look so blue, so dismally blue ! 

By and by I shall take up the Rhone open-boat voyage 
again, but not now — we are going to be moving around 
too much. I have torn up some of it, but still have 15,000 
words that Mrs. Clemens approves of, and that I like. 
I may go at it in Paris again next winter, but not unless 
I know I can write it to suit me. 

Otherwise I shall tackle Adam once more, and do him 
in a kind of a friendly and respectful way that will com- 

591 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



mend him to the Sunday schools. I've been thinking out 
his first life-days to-day and framing his childish and 
ignorant impressions and opinions for him. 

Will ship Pudd'nhead in a few days. When you get it 
cable 

Mark Twain, 

Care Brownship, London 

Received. 

I mean to ship "Pudd'nhead Wilson" to you — say, 
tomorrow. It'll furnish me hash for awhile I reckon. I 
am almost sorry it is finished; it was good entertainment 
to work at it, and kept my mind away from things. 

We leave here in about ten days, but the doctors have 
changed our plans again. I think we shall be in Bohemia 
or thereabouts till near the end of September, then go to 
Paris and take a rest. Yours Sincerely 

S. L. C. 

P. S. Mrs. Clemens has come in since, and read your 
letter and is deeply distressed. She thinks that in some 
letter of mine I must have reproached you. She says it is 
wonderful that you have kept the ship afloat in this storm 
that has seen fleets and fleets go down ; that from what she 
learns of the American business-situation from her home 
letters you have accomplished a marvel in the circum- 
stances, and that she cannot bear to have a word said to 
you that shall voice anything but praise and the heartiest 
appreciation— and not the shadow of a reproach will she 
allow. 

I tell her I didn't reproach you and never thought of 
such a thing. And I said I would break open my letter 
and say so. 

Mrs. Clemens says I must tell you not to send any 
money for a month or two — so that you may be afforded 
what little relief is in our power. All right — I'm willing; 
(this is honest) but I wish Brer Chatto would send along 
his little yearly contribution. I dropped him a line about 

592 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



another matter a week ago— asked him to subscribe for 
the Daily News for me — you see I wanted to remind him 
in a covert way that it was pay-up time — but doubtless I 
directed the letter to you or some one else, for I don't 
hear from him and don't get any Daily News either. 

To Fred J. Hall in New York: 

Aug. 6 t t Q3. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — I am very sorry — it was thoughtless 
in me. Let the reports go. Send me once a month two 
items, and two only: 

Cash liabilities— (so much) 

Cash assets— (so much) 

I can perceive the condition of the business at a glance, 
then, and that will be sufficient. 

Here we never see a newspaper, but even if we did I 
could not come anywhere near appreciating or correctly 
estimating the tempest you have been buffeting your 
way through — only the man who is in it can do that — 
but I have tried not to burden you thoughtlessly or 
wantonly. I have been wrought and unsettled in mind 
by apprehensions, and that is a thing that is not helpable 
when one is in a strange land and sees his resources melt 
down to a two months' supply and can't see any sure 
daylight beyond. The bloody machine offered but a 
doubtful outlook — and will still offer nothing much 
better for a long time to come; for when Davis's "three 
weeks" is up there's three months' tinkering to follow I 
guess. That is unquestionably the boss machine of the 
world, but is the toughest one on prophets, when it is in 
an incomplete state, that has ever seen the light. Neither 
Davis nor any other man can foretell with any considerable 
approach to certainty when it will be ready to get down to 
actual work in a printing office. 

[No signature.] 

Three days after the foregoing letter was written he wrote, 
briefly: 

593 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

"Great Scott but it's a long year — for you and me! I never 
knew the almanac to drag so. At least since I was finishing that 
other machine. 

"I watch for your letters hungrily — just as I used to watch 
for the cablegram saying the machine's finished; but when 
'next week certainly' swelled into 'three weeks sure* I recog- 
nized the old familiar tune I used to hear so much. Ward 
don't know what sickheartedness is — but he is in a way to find 
out." 

Always the quaint form of his humor, no matter how dark 
the way. We may picture him walking the floor, planning, 
scheming, and smoking — always smoking — trying to find a way 
out. It was not the kind of scheming that many men have done 
under the circumstances; not scheming to avoid payment of 
debts, but to pay them. 

To Fred J. Hall, in New York: 

Aug. 14, 'oj. 

Dear Mr. Hall, — I am very glad indeed if you and 
Mr. Langdon are able to see any daylight ahead. To me 
none is visible. I strongly advise that every penny that 
comes in shall be applied to paying off debts. I may be 
in error about this, but it seems to me that we have no 
other course open. We can pay a part of the debts owing 
to outsiders — none to the Clemenses. In very prosperous 
times we might regard our stock and copyrights as assets 
sufficient, with the money owing to us, to square up and 
quit even, but I suppose we may not hope for such luck 
in the present condition of things. 

What I am mainly hoping for, is to save my royalties. 
If they come into danger I hope you will cable me, so 
that I can come over and try to save them, for if they go 
I am a beggar. 

I would sail to-day if I had anybody to take charge of 
my family and help them through the difficult journeys 
commanded by the doctors. I may be able to sail ten 
days hence; I hope so, and expect so. 

We can never resurrect the L. A. L. I would not spend 
any more money on that book. You spoke, a while back, 

594 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



of trying to start it up again as a preparation to disposing 
of it, but we are not in shape to venture that, I think. It 
would require more borrowing, and we must not do that. 

Yours Sincerely 

S. L. C. 

Aug. 16. I have thought, and thought, but I don't 
seem to arrive in any very definite place. Of course you 
will not have an instant's safety until the bank debts are 
paid. There is nothing to be thought of but to hand over 
every penny as fast as it comes in — and that will be slow 
enough! Or could you secure them by pledging part of 
our cash assets and — 

I am coming over, just as soon as I can get the family 
moved and settled. S. L. C. 

Two weeks following this letter he could endure the suspense 
no longer, and on August 29th sailed once more for America. 
In New York, Clemens settled down at the Players Club, where 
he could live cheaply, and undertook some literary work while 
he was casting about for ways and means to relieve the financial 
situation. Nothing promising occurred, until one night at the 
Murray Hill Hotel he was introduced by Dr. Clarence C. Rice 
to Henry H. Rogers, of the Standard Oil group of financiers. 

admirer of Mark Twain's work. It was a mirthful evening, and 
certainly an eventful one in Mark Twain's life. A day or two 
later Doctor Rice asked the millionaire to interest himself a 
little in Clemens 's business affairs, which he thought a good deal 
confused. Just what happened is not remembered now, but from 
the date of the next letter we realize that a discussion of the mat- 
ter by Clemens and Rogers must have followed pretty promptly. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Europe: 

Oct. j 8 ', *Q3. 

Dear, dear Sweetheart,— I don't seem to get even 
half a chance to write you, these last two days, and yet 
there's lots to say. 

Apparently everything is at last settled as to the give- 

595 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



away of L. A. L., and the papers will be signed and the 
transfer made to-morrow morning. 

Meantime I have got the best and wisest man in the 
whole Standard Oil group of multi-millionaires a good 
deal interested in looking into the type-setter (this is 
private, don't mention it.) He has been searching into 
that thing for three weeks, and yesterday he said to me. 
14 1 find the machine to be all you represented it— I have 
here exhaustive reports from my own experts, and I 
know every detail of its capacity, its immense value, its 
construction, cost, history, and all about its inventor's 
character. I know that the New York Co. and the 
Chicago Co. are both stupid, and that they are unbusiness- 
like people, destitute of money and in a hopeless boggle." 

Then he told me the scheme he had planned, then 
said: "If I can arrange with these people on this basis- 
it will take several weeks to find out— I will see to it that 
they get the money they need. Then the thing will move 
right along and your royalties will cease to be waste paper. 
I will post you the minute my scheme fails or succeeds. 
In the meantime, you stop walking the floor. Go off to the 
country and try to be gay. You may have to go to walk- 
ing again, but don't begin till I tell you my scheme has 
failed." And he added: "Keep me posted always as to 
where you are — for if I need you and can use you I want 
to know where to put my hand on you." 

If I should even divulge the fact that the Standard Oil 
is merely talking remotely about going into the type-setter, 
it would send my royalties up. 

With worlds and worlds of love and kisses to you all, 

Saml. 

With so great a burden of care shifted to the broad financial 
shoulders of H. H. Rogers, Mark Twain's spirits went ballooning, 
soaring toward the stars. He awoke, too, to some of the social 
gaieties about him, and found pleasure in the things that in 
the hour of his gloom had seemed mainly mockery. We find 
him going to a Sunday evening at Howeils's, to John Mackay's, 
and elsewhere. 

596 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

Dec. 2 t '93. 

Lxvy darling, — Last night at John Mackay's the dinner 
consisted of soup, raw oysters, corned beef and cabbage, 
and something like a custard. I ate without fear or stint, 
and yet have escaped all suggestion of indigestion. The 
men present were old gray Pacific-coasters whom I knew 
when I and they were young and not gray. The talk was 
of the days when we went gypsying a long time ago — 
thirty years. Indeed it was a talk of the dead. Mainly 
that. And of how they looked, and the harum-scarum 
things they did and said. For there were no cares in that 
life, no aches and pains, and not time enough in the day 
(and three-fourths of the night) to work off one's surplus 
vigor and energy. Of the mid-night highway robbery 
joke played upon me with revolvers at my head on the 
wind-swept and desolate Gold Hill Divide, no witness is 
left but me, the victim. All the friendly robbers are gone. 
These old fools last night laughed till they cried over the 
particulars of that old forgotten crime. 

John Mackay has no family here but a pet monkey — a 
most affectionate and winning little devil. But he makes 
trouble for the servants, for he is full of curiosity and 
likes to take everything out of the drawers and examine 
it minutely; and he puts nothing back. The examinations 
of yesterday count for nothing to-day — he makes a new 
examination every day. But he injures nothing. 

I went with Laffan to the Racquet Club the other night 
and played billiards two hours without starting up any 
rheumatism. I suppose it was all really taken out of me 
in Berlin. 

Richard Harding Davis spoke yesterday of Clara's 
impersonations at Mrs. Van Rensselaer's here and said 
they were a wonderful piece of work. 

Livy dear, I do hope you are comfortable, as to quar- 
ters and food at the Hotel Brighton. But if you're not 
don't stay there. Make one more effort — don't give it 

597 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



up. Dear heart, this is from one who loves you — which is 
Saml. 

It was decided that Rogers and Clemens should make a trip 
to Chicago to investigate personally the type-setter situation 
there. Clemens reports the details of the excursion to Mrs. 
Clemens in a long subdivided letter, most of which has no gen- 
eral interest and is here omitted. The trip, as a whole, would 
seem to have been satisfactory. The personal portions of the 
long Christmas letter may properly be preserved. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

The Players, Xmas, 18Q3. 

No. 1. 

Merry Xmas, my darling, and all my darlings! I 
arrived from Chicago close upon midnight last night, and 
wrote and sent down my Christmas cablegram before 
undressing: "Merry Xmas! Promising progress made 
in Chicago." It would get to the telegraph office toward 
8 this morning and reach you at luncheon. 

I was vaguely hoping, all the past week, that my Xmas 
cablegram would be definite, and make you all jump with 
jubilation; but the thought always intruded itself, "You 
are not going out there to negotiate with a man, but with 
a louse. This makes results uncertain." 

I was asleep as Christmas struck upon the clock at mid- 
night, and didn't wake again till two hours ago. It is 
now half past 10 Xmas morning; I have had my cofTee 
and bread, and shan't get out of bed till it is time to dress 
for Mrs. Laffan's Christmas dinner this evening — where 
I shall meet Bram Stoker and must make sure about that 
photo with Irving's autograph. I will get the picture and 
he will attend to the rest. In order to remember and not 
forget — well, I will go there with my dress coat wrong 
side out ; it will cause remark and then I shall remember. 

No. 2 and 3. 

I tell you it was interesting! The Chicago campaign, 
I mean. On the way out Mr. Rogers would plan out the 

598 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

campaign while I walked the floor and smoked and 
assented- Then be would close it up with a snap and 
drop it and we would totally change the subject and take 
up the scenery, etc. . . 

(Here follows the long detailed report of the Chicago confer- 
ence, of interest only to the parties directly concerned.) 

No. 4. 

We had nice trip?, going and coming. Mr. Rogers had 
telegraphed the Pennsylvania Railroad for a couple of 
sections for us in the fast train leaving at 2 p. m. the 22nd. 
The Vice President telegraphed back that every berth 
was engaged (which was not true — it goes without saying) 
but that he was sending bis own car for us. It was mighty 
nice and comfortable. In its parlor it had two sofas, 
which could become beds at night. It had four com- 
fortably-cushioned cane arm-chairs. It had a very nice 
bedroom with a wide bed in it ; which I said I would take 
because I believed I was a little wider than Mr. Rogers — 
which turned out to be true; so I took it. It had a darling 
back-porch — railed, roofed and roomy; and there we sat, 
most of the time, and viewed the scenery and talked, for 
the weather was May weather, and the soft dream-pictures 
of hill and river and mountain and sky were clear and away 
beyond anything I have ever seen for exquisiteness and 
daintiness. 

The colored waiter knew his business, and the colored 
cook was a finished artist. Breakfasts: coffee with real 
cream; beefsteaks, sausage, bacon, chops, eggs in various 
ways, potatoes in various — yes. and quite wonderful baked 
potatoes, and hot as fire. Dinners — all manner of things, 
including canvas - back duck, apollinaris, claret, cham- 
pagne, etc. 

We sat up chatting till midnight, going and coming; 
seldom read a line, day or night, though we were well fixed 
with magazines, etc. ; then I finished off with a hot Scotch 
and we went to bed and slept till 9.30 a. m. I honestly 

599 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

tried to pay my share of hotel bills, fees, etc., but I was 
not allowed — and I knew the reason why, and respected 
the motive. I will explain when I see you, and then you 
will understand. 

We were 25 hours going to Chicago; we were there 24 
hours; we were 30 hours returning. Brisk work, but all 
of it enjoyable. We insisted on leaving the car at Phila- 
delphia so that our waiter and cook (to whom Mr. R. 
gave $10 apiece,) could have their Christmas-eve at home. 
Mr. Rogers's carriage was waiting for us in Jersey City 
and deposited me at the Players. There — that's all. 
Tbis letter is to make up for the three letterless days. I 
love you, dear heart, I love you all. 

Saml 



Digitized by Google 



XXXIV 



LETTERS 1894. A WINTER IN NEW YORK. BUSINESS 
FAILURE. END OP THE MACHINE 

THE beginning of the new year found Mark Twain sailing 
buoyantly on a tide of optimism. He believed that with 
H. H. Rogers as his financial pilot he could weather safely any 
storm or stress. He could divert himself, or rest, or work, and 
consider his business affairs with interest and amusement, in- 
stead of with haggard anxiety. He ran over to Hartford to 
see an amateur play; to Boston to give a charity reading; to 
Fair Haven to open the library which Mr. Rogers had estab- 

gay dinners, receptions, and late 
studio parties, acquiring the name of the "Belle of New York." 
In the letters that follow we get the echo of some of these things. 
The Mrs. Rice mentioned in the next brief letter was the wife 
of Dr. Clarence C. Rice, who had introduced H. H. Rogers to 
Mark Twain. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

Jan. 12, '94. 

Livy darling, I came down from Hartford yesterday 
with Kipling, and he and Hutton and I had the small 
smoking compartment to ourselves and found him at 
last at his ease, and not shy. He was very pleasant com- 
pany indeed. He is to be in the city a week, and I wish 
I could invite him to dinner, but it won't do. I should 
be interrupted by business, of course. The construction 
of a contract that will suit Paige's lawyer (not Paige) 
turns out to be very difficult. He is embarrassed by 
earlier advice to Paige, and hates to retire from it and 
stultify himself. The negotiations are being conducted 

601 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



by means of tedious long telegrams and by talks over the 
long-distance telephone. We keep the wires loaded. 

Dear me, dinner is ready. So Mrs. Rice says. 

With worlds of love, Saml. 

Clemens and Oliver Wendell Holmes had met and become 
friends soon after the publication of Innocents Abroad, in 1869. 
Now, twenty-five years later, we find a record of what without 
doubt was their last meeting. It occurred at the home of Mrs. 
James T. Field. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

Boston, Jan. 2$, '04. 
Livy darling, I am caught out worse this time than ever 
before, in the matter of letters. Tuesday morning I was 
smart enough to finish and mail my long letter to you 
before breakfast — for I was suspecting that I would not 
have another spare moment during the day. It turned 
out just so. 

In a thoughtless moment I agreed to come up here and 
read for the poor. I did not reflect that it would cost me 
three days. I could not get released. Yesterday I had 
myself called at 8 and ran out to Mr. Rogers's house at 9, 
and talked business until half past 10; then caught 11 
o'clock train and arrived here at 6 ; was shaven and dressed 
by 7 and ready for dinner here in Mrs. Field's charming 
house. 

Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes never goes out now (he is 
in his 84th year,) but he came out this time — said he 
wanted to "have a time" once more with me. 

Mrs. Fields said Aldrich begged to come and went away 
crying because she wouldn't let him. She allowed only 
her family (Sarah Orne Jewett and sister) to be present, 
because much company would overtax Dr. Holmes. 

Well, be was just delightful ! He did as brilliant and 
beautiful talking (and listening) as ever he did in his life, 
I guess. Field? and Jewett said he hadn't been in such 
splendid form in years. He had ordered his carriage for 9. 

602 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The coachman sent in for him at 9; but he said, "Oh, 
nonsense! — leave glories and grandeurs like these? Tell 
him to go away and come in an hour!" 

At 10 he was called for again, and Mrs. Fields, getting 
uneasy, rose, but he wouldn't go — and so we rattled ahead 
the same as ever. Twice more Mrs. Fields rose, but he 
wouldn't go — and he didn't go till half past 10 — an 
unwarrantable dissipation for him in these days. He 
was prodigiously complimentary about some of my 
books, and is having Pudd'nhead read to him. I told 
him you and I used the Autocrat as a courting book and 
marked it all through, and that you keep it in the sacred 
green box with the love letters, and it pleased him. 

Good-bye, my dear darling, it is 15 minutes to dinner 
and I'm not dressed yet. I have a reception to-night and 
will be out very late at that place and at Irving's Theatre 
where I have a complimentary box. I wish you were all 
here. " Saml. 

In the next letter we meet James J. Corbett — "Gentleman 
Jim," as he was sometimes called — the champion pugilist of that 
day. 

The Howells incident so amusingly dramatized will perhaps 
be more appreciated if the reader remembers that Mark Twain 
himself had at intervals been a mind-healing enthusiast. In- 
deed, in spite of his strictures on Mrs. Eddy, his interest in the 
subject of mind-cure continued to the end of his life. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

Sunday, 9 30 a. m. 
Livy dear, when we got out to the house last night, Mrs. 
Rogers, who is up and around, now, didn't want to go 
down stairs to dinner, but Mr. R. persuaded her and we 
had a very good time indeed. By 8 o'clock we were down 
again and bought a fifteen-dollar box in the Madison 
Square Garden (Rogers bought it, not I,) then he went 
and fetched Dr. Rice while I (went) to the Players and 
picked up two artists— Reid and Simmons — and thus we 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



filled s of the 6 seats. There was a vast multitude of 
people in the brilliant place. Stanford White came along 
presently and invited me to go to the World -Champion's 
dressing room, which I was very glad to do. Corbett has 
a fine face and is modest and diffident, besides being the 
most perfectly and beautifully constructed human animal 
in the world. I said — 

"You have whipped Mitchell, and maybe you will whip 
Jackson in June — but you are not done, then. You will 
have to tackle me." 

He answered, so gravely that one might easily have 
thought him in earnest — 

"No — I am not going to meet you in the ring. It is 
not fair or right to require it. You might chance to 
knock me out, by no merit of your own, but by a purely 
accidental blow; and then my reputation would be gone 
and you would have a double one. You have got fame 
enough and you ought not to want to take mine away 
from me." 

Corbett was for a long time a clerk in the Nevada Bank 
in San Francisco. 

There were lots of little boxing matches, to entertain 
the crowd: then at last Corbett appeared in the ring and 
the 8,ooo people present went mad with enthusiasm. My 
two artists went mad about his form. They said they 
had never seen anything that came reasonably near 
equaling its perfection except Greek statues, and they 
didn't surpass it. 

Corbett boxed 3 rounds with the middle-weight Aus- 
tralian champion — oh, beautiful to see! — then the show 
was over and we struggled out through a perfect wash of 
humanity. When we reached the street I found I had 
left my arctics in the box. I had to have them, so Simmons 
said he would go back and get them, and I didn't dissuade 
him. I couldn't see how he was going to make his way a 
single yard into that solid oncoming wave of people- 
yet he must plow through it full 50 yards. He was 
back with the shoes in 3 minutes! 

604 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



How do you reckon he accomplished that miracle? 
By saying — 

"Way, gentlemen, please — coming to fetch Mr. Cor- 
Dett s oversnoes. 

The word flew from mouth to mouth, the Red Sea 
divided, and Simmons walked comfortably through and 
back, dry shod. Simmons (this was revealed to me under 
seal of secrecy by Reid) is the hero of "Gwen," and he and 
Gwen's author were once engaged to marry. This is 
"fire-escape" Simmons, the inveterate talker, you know: 
"Exit — in case of Simmons. 11 

I had an engagement at a beautiful dwelling close to 
the Players for 10.30; I was there by 10.45. Thirty 
cultivated and very musical ladies and gentlemen present 
— all of them acquaintances and many of them personal 
friends of mine. That wonderful Hungarian Band was 
there (they charge $500 for an evening.) Conversation 
and Band until midnight; then a bite of supper; then 
the company was compactly grouped before me and I 
told about Dr. B. E. Martin and the etchings, and followed 
it with the Scotch-Irish Christening. My, but the Martin 
is a darling story! Next, the head tenor from the Opera 
sang half a dozen great songs that set the company wild, 
yes, mad with delight, that nobly handsome young Dam- 
rosch accompanying on the piano. 

Just a little pause — then the Band burst out into an 
explosion of weird and tremendous dance music, a Hun- 
garian celebrity and his wife took the floor— I followed; 
I couldn't help it; the others drifted in, one by one, and 
it was Onteora over again. 

By half past 4 I had danced all those people down — 
and yet was not tired; merely breathless. I was in bed 
at 5, and asleep in ten minutes. Up at 9 and presently 
at work on this letter to you. I think I wrote until 2 or 
half past. Then I walked leisurely out to Mr. Rogers's 
(it is called 3 miles but it is short of it) arriving at 3.30, 
but he was out— to return at 5.30 — (and a person 
was in, whom I don't particularly like)— so I didn't 

ii- — 11 605 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



stay, but dropped over and chatted with the Howellses 
until 6. 

First, Howells and I had a chat together. I asked 
about Mrs. H. He said she was fine, still steadily improv- 
ing, and nearly back to her old best health. I asked 
(as if I didn't know) : 

"What do you attribute this strange miracle to?'* 

"Mind-cure — simply mind-cure." 

"Lord, what a conversion! You were a scoffer three 
months ago." 

"I? I wasn't." 

"You were. You made elaborate fun of me in this 
very room." 

"I did not, Clemens." 

"It's a lie, Howells, you did." 

I detailed to him the conversation of that time — with 
the stately argument furnished by Boyesen in the fact 
that a patient had actually been killed by a rrund-curist; 
and Howells's own smart remark that when the mind- 
curist is done with you, you have to call in a "regular" 
at last because the former can't procure you a burial 
permit. 

At last he gave in — he said he remembered that talk, 
but had now been a mind-curist so long it was difficult for 
him to realize that he had ever been anything else. 

Mrs. H. came skipping in, presently, the very person, 
to a dot, that she used to be, so many years ago. 

Mrs. H. said: "People may call it what they like, but 
it is just hypnotism, and that's all it is— hypnotism pure 
and simple. M ind -cure !— the idea! Why, this woman 
that cured me hasn't got any mind. She's a good creature, 
but she's dull and dumb and illiterate and — " 

"Now Eleanor!" 

"I know what I'm talking about! — don't I go there 
twice a week? And Mr. Clemens, if you could only see 
her wooden and satisfied face when she snubs me for 
forgetting myself and showing by a thoughtless remark 
that to me weather is still weather, instead of being just 

606 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



an abstraction and a superstition — oh, it's the funniest 
thing you ever saw ! A-n-d — when she tilts up her nose — 
well, it's — it's — Well it's that kind of a nose that — " 

''Now Eleanor! — the woman is not responsible for her 
nose — " and so-on and so-on. It didn't seem to me that 
I had any right to be having this feast and you not there. 

She convinced me before she got through, that she and 
William James are right — hypnotism and mind-cure are 
the same thing; no difference between them. Very well; 
the very source, the very center of hypnotism is Paris. 
Dr. Charcot's pupils and disciples are right there and 
ready to your hand without fetching poor dear old Susy 
across the stormy sea. Let Mrs. Mackay (to whom I send 
my best respects, tell you whom to go to to learn all you 
need to learn and how to proceed. Do, do it, honey. 
Don't lose a minute. 

... At 1 1 o'clock last night Mr. Rogers said: 

14 / am able to feel physical fatigue — and I feel it now. 
You never show any, either in your eyes or your move- 
ments; do you ever feel any?" 

I was able to say that I had forgotten what that feeling 
was like. Don't you remember how almost impossible it 
was for me to tire myself at the Villa? Well, it is just so 
in New York I go to bed unfatigued at 3, I get up fresh 
and fine six hours later. I believe I have taken only one 
daylight nap since I have been here. 



When the anchor is down, then I shall say: 
"Farewell— a long farewell— to business! I will never 

touch it again!" 

I will live in literature, I will wallow in it, revel in it, 

I will swim in ink ! Joan of Arc — but all this is premature ; 

the anchor is not down yet. 



To-morrow (Tuesday) I will add a P. S. if I've any to 
add; but, whether or no, I must mail this to morrow, 
for the mail steamer goes next day. 

607 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



5.30 p. m. Great Scott, this is Tuesday ! I must rush 
this letter into the mail instantly. 

Tell that sassy Ben I've got ber welcome letter, and FD 
write her as soon as I get a daylight chance. I've most 
time at night, but I'd druther write daytimes. Saml 

The Reid and Simmons mentioned in the foregoing were 
Robert Reid and Edward Simmons, distinguished painter— 
the latter a brilliant, fluent, and industrious talker. The title, 
"Fire-escape Simmons," which Clemens gives him, originated 
when Oliver Herford, whose quaint wit has so long delighted 
New-Yorkers, one day pinned up by the back door of the 
Players the notice: " Exit incase of Simmons." Owen, a popular 
novel of that day, was written by Blanche Willis Howard. 

"Jamie" Dodge, in the next letter, was the son of Mrs. Mary 
Mapes Dodge, editor of St. Nicholas. 

To Clara Clemens, in Paris: 

Mr. Rogers's Office, Feb. 5, '04. 

Dear Benny — I was intending to answer your letter 
to-day, but I am away down town, and will simply whirl 
together a sentence or two for good-fellowship. I have 
bought photographs of Coquelin and Jane Hading and 
will ask them to sign them. I shall meet Coquelin to- 
morrow night, and if Hading is not present I will send 
her picture to her by somebody. 

I am to breakfast with Madame Nordica in a few days, 
and meantime I hope to get a good picture of her to sign. 
She was of the breakfast company yesterday, but the 
picture of herself which she signed and gave me does not 
do her majestic beauty justice. 

I am too busy to attend to the photo-collecting right, 
because I have to live up to the name which Jamie Dodge 
has given me— the "Belle of New York"— and it just 
keeps me rushing. Yesterday I had engagements to 
breakfast at noon, dine at 3, and dine again at 7. I got 
away from the long breakfast at 2 p. m., went and excused 
myself from the 3 o'clock dinner, then lunched with Mrs. 

608 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Dodge in 58th street, returned to the Players and dressed, 
dined out at 7, and was back at Mrs. Dodge's at 10 p. m. 
where we had magic-lantern views of a superb sort, and 
a lot of yarns until an hour after midnight, and got to 
bed at 2 this morning — a good deal of a gain on my recent 
hours. But I don't get tired; I sleep as sound as a dead 
person, and always wake up fresh and strong — usually 
at exactly 9. 

I was at breakfast lately where people of seven separate 
nationalities sat and the seven languages were going all 
the time. At my side sat a charming gentleman who was 
a delightful and active talker, and interesting. He 
talked glibly to those folks in all those seven languages 
—and still had a language to spare ! I wanted to kill him, 
for very envy. 

I greet you with love and kisses. Papa. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

Feb. — . 

Livy dear, last night I played billiards with Mr. Rogers 
until 1 x , then went to Robert Reid's studio and had a most 
delightful time until 4 this morning. No ladies were 
invited this time. Among the people present were — 

Coquelin; 

Richard Harding Davis; 
Harrison, the great out-door painter; 
Wm. H. Chase, the artist ; 
Bettini, inventor of the new phonograph. 
Nikola Tesla, the world-wide illustrious electrician; 
see article about him in Jan. or Feb. Century. 
John Drew, actor; 

James Barnes, a marvelous mimic; my, you should 
see him! 
Smedley the artist; 
Zorn the artist; 
Zogbaum the artist; 
Reinhart the artist; 
Metcalf the artist; 

609 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Ancona, head tenor at the Opera; 

Oh, a great lot of others. Everybody there had done 
something and was in his way famous. 

Somebody welcomed Coquelin in a nice little French 
speech; John Drew did the like for me in English, and 
then the fun began. Coquelin did some excellent French 
monologues — one of them an ungrammatical English- 
man telling a colorless historiette in French. It nearly 
killed the fifteen or twenty people who understood it. 

I told a yarn, Ancona sang half a dozen songs, Barnes 
did his darling imitations, Harding Davis sang the hanging 
of Danny Deever, which was of course good, but he fol- 
lowed it with that most fascinating (for what reason I 
don't know) of all Kipling's poems, "On the Road to 
Mandalay," sang it tenderly, and it searched me deeper 
and charmed me more than the Deever. 

Young Gerrit Smith played some ravishing dance- 
music and we all danced about an hour. There couldn't 
be a pleasanter night than that one was. Some of those 
people complained of fatigue but I don't seem to know 
what the sense of fatigue is. 

Coquelin talks quite good English now. He said — 

" I have a brother who has the fine mind— ah, a charm- 
ing and delicate fancy, and he knows your writings so 
well, and loves them — and that is the same with me. 
It will stir him so when I write and tell him I have seen 
you!" 

Wasn't that nice? We talked a good deal together. He 
is as winning as his own face. But he wouldn't sign that 
photograph for Clara. "That? No! She shall have a 
better one. I will send it to you." 

He is much driven, and will forget it, but Reid has 
promised to get the picture for me, and I will try and keep 
him reminded. 

Oh, dear, my time is all used up and your letters are not 
answered. 

Mama, dear, I don't go everywhere — I decline most 
things. But there are plenty that I can't well get out of. 

610 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I will remember what you say and not make my yarning 
too common. 

I am so glad Susy has gone on that trip and that you 
are trying the electric. May you both prosper. For you 
are mighty dear to me and in my thoughts always. 

Saml. 

The affairs of the Webster Publishing Company were by this 
time getting into a very serious condition indeed. The effects 
of the panic of the year before could not be overcome. Creditors 
were pressing their claims and profits were negligible. In the 
following letter we get a Mark Twain estimate of the great 
financier who so cheerfully was willing to undertake the solving 
of Mark Twain's financial problems. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

The Players, Feb. 75, 'p¥- ** jo P- 
Livy darling, Yesterday I talked all my various matters 
over with Mr. Rogers and we decided that it would be 
safe for me to leave here the 7th of March, in the New 
York. So his private secretary, Miss Harrison, wrote and 
ordered a berth for me and then I lost no time in cabling 
you that I should reach Southampton March 14, and 
Paris the 15th. Land, but it made my pulses leap, to 
think I was going to see you again ! ... One thing at a 
time. I never fully laid Webster's disastrous condition 
before Mr. Rogers until to-night after billiards. I did 
hate to burden his good heart and over-worked head 
with it, but he took hold with avidity and said it was no 
burden to work for his friends, but a pleasure. We dis- 
cussed it from various standpoints, and found it a suffi- 
ciently difficult problem to solve; but he thinks that after 
he has rlept upon it and thought it over he will know what 
to suggest. 

You must not think I am ever rude with Mr. Rogers, 
I am not. He is not common clay, but fine — fine and 
delicate — and that sort do not call out the coarsenesses 
that are in my sort. I am never afraid of wounding him; 

611 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I do not need to watch myself in that matter. The sight 
of him is peace. 

He wants to go to Japan — it is his dream; wants to 
go with me — which means, the two families — and hear 
no more about business for awhile, and have a rest. And 
he needs it. But it is like all the dreams of all busy men — 
fated to remain dreams. 

You perceive that he is a pleasant text for me. It is 
easy to write about him. When I arrived in September, 
lord how black the prospect was — how desperate, how 
incurably desperate! Webster and Co had to have a 
small sum of money or go under at once. I flew to Hart- 
ford — to my friends — but they were not moved, not 
strongly interested, and I was ashamed that I went. 
It was from Mr. Rogers, a stranger, that I got the money 
and was by it saved. And then — while still a stranger — 
he set himself the task of saving my financial life without 
putting upon me (in his native delicacy) any sense that 
I was the recipient of a charity, a benevolence — and he 
has accomplished that task; accomplished it at a cost of 
three months of wearing and difficult labor. He gave 
that time to me — time which could not be bought by 
any man at a hundred thousand dollars a month — no, 
nor for three times the money. 

Well, in the midst of that great fight, that long 
and admirable fight, George Warner came to me and 
said — 

"There is a splendid chance open to you. I know a 
man— a prominent man — who has written a book that 
will go like wildfire; a book that arraigns the Standard 
Oil fiends, and gives them unmitigated hell, individual by 
individual. It is the very book for you to publish; there 
is a fortune in it, and I can put you in communication 
with the author." 

I wanted to say — 

"The only man I care for in the world; the only man 
I would give a damn for; the only man who is lavishing 
his sweat and blood to save me and mine from starvation 

612 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and shame, is a Standard Oil fiend. If you know me, you 
know whether I want the book or not." 

But I didn't say that. I said I didn't want any book; 
I wanted to get out of the publishing business and out 
of all business, and was here for that purpose and would 
accomplish it if I could. 

But there's enough. I shall be asleep by 3, and I don't 
need much sleep, because I am never drowsy or tired these 
days. Dear, dear Susy — my strength reproaches me when 
I think of her and you, my darling. 

Saml. 

But even so able a man as Henry Rogers could not accom- 
plish the impossible. The affairs of the Webster Company were 
hopeless, the business was not worth saving. By Mr. Rogers's 
advice an assignment was made April, 18, 1894. After its early 
spectacular success less than ten years had brought the business 
to failure. The publication of the Grant memoirs had been its 
only great achievement. 

Clemens would seem to have believed that the business would 
resume, and for a time Rogers appears to have comforted him 
in his hope, but we cannot believe that it long survived. Young 
Hall, who had made such a struggle for its salvation, was eager 
to go on, but he must presently have seen the futility of any 
effort in that direction. 

Of course the failure of Mark Twain's firm made a great stir 
in the country, and it is easy to understand that loyal friends 
would rally in his behalf. 

To Mrs. Clemens, in Paris: 

April 22, '94. 

Dear old darling, we all think the creditors are going 
to allow us to resume business; and if they do we shall 
pull through and pay the debts. I am prodigiously glad 
we made an assignment. And also glad that we did not 
make it sooner. Earlier we should have made a poor 
showing; but now we shall make a good one. 

I meet flocks of people, and they all shake me cordially 
by the band and say "I was so sorry to hear of the assign- 

613 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ment, but so glad you did it. It was around, this long 
time, that the concern was tottering, and all your 
friends were afraid you would delay the assignment too 
long." 

John Mackay called yesterday, and said, "Don't let 
it disturb you, Sam — we all have to do it, at one time or 
another; it's nothing to be ashamed of." 

One stranger out in New York State sent me a dollar 
bill and thought he would like to get up a dollar-sub- 
scription for me. And Poultney Bigelow's note came 
promptly, with his check for $i ,000. I had been meeting 
him every day at the Club and liking him better and better 
all the time. I couldn't take his money, of course, but I 
thanked him cordially for his good will. 

Now and then a good and dear Joe Twichell or Susy 
Warner condoles with me and says "Cheer up — don't be 
downhearted," and some other friend says, "I am glad 
and surprised to see how cheerful you are and how bravely 
you stand it" — and none of them suspect what a burden 
has been lifted from me and how blithe I am inside. 
Except when I think of you, dear heart — then I am not 
blithe; for I seem to see you grieving and ashamed, and 
dreading to look people in the face. For in the thick of 
the fight there is cheer, but you are far away and cannot 
hear the drums nor see the wheeling squadrons. You only 
seem to see rout, retreat, and dishonored colors dragging 
in the dirt — whereas none of these things exist. There is 
temporary defeat, but no dishonor — and we will march 
again. Charley Warner said to-day, "Sho, Livy isn't 
worrying. So long as she's got you and the children she 
doesn't care what happens. She knows it isn't 
Which didn't convince me. 

Good bye my darling, I love you and all of the kida — 
and you can tell Clara lam not a spitting gray kitten. 

Saml. 

Clemens sailed for Europe as scon as his affairs would per- 
mit him to go. He must get settled where he could work 

614 

1 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



comfortably. Type-setter prospects seemed promising, but 
meantime there was need of funds. 

He began writing on the ship, as was his habit, and had 
completed his article on Fenimore Cooper by the time he 
reached London. In August we find him writing to Mr. 
Rogers from Etretat, a little Norman watering-place. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

Etretat, (Normandik) 

(Chalet des Abris) 
Aug. 2$ % % 94. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — I find the Madam ever so much 
better in health and strength. The air is superb and 
soothing and wholesome, and the Chalet is remote from 
noise and people, and just the place to write in. I shall 
begin work this afternoon. 

Mrs. Clemens is in great spirits on account of the benefit 
which she has received from the electrical treatment in 
Paris and is bound to take it up again and continue it 
all the winter, and of course I am perfectly willing. She 
requires me to drop the lecture platform out of my mind 
and go straight ahead with Joan until the book is finished. 
If I should have to go home for even a week she means to 
go with me — won't consent to be separated again — but 
she hopes I won't need to go. 

I tell her all right, 44 I won't go unless you send, and then 
I must:' 

She keeps the accounts; and as she ciphers it we can't 
get crowded for money for eight months yet. I didn't 
know that. But I don't know much anyway. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The reader may remember that Clemens had written the first 
half of his Joan of Arc book at the Villa Viviani, in Florence, 
nearly two years before. He had closed the manuscript then 
with the taking of Orleans, and was by no means sure that he 
would continue the story beyond that point. Now, however, he 
was determined to reach the tale's tragic conclusion. 

615 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

Etretat, 
Sunday, Sept. p, '94. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — I drove the quill too hard, and 
I broke down — in my head. It has now been three days 
since I laid up. When I wrote you a # week ago I had added 
10,000 words or thereabout to Joan. Next day I added 
1,500 which was a proper enough day's work though not 
a full one ; but during Tuesday and Wednesday I stacked 
up an aggregate of 6,000 words— and that was a very large 
mistake. My head hasn't been worth a cent since. 

However, there's a compensation ; for in those two days 
I reached and passed — successfully — a point which I was 
solicitous about before I ever began the book: viz., 
the battle of Patay. Because that would naturally be the 
next to the last chapter of a work consisting of either 
two books or one. In the one case one goes right along 
from that point (as I shall do now) ; in the other he would 
add a wind-up chapter and make the book consist of 
Joan's childhood and military career alone. 

I shall resume work to-day; and hereafter I will not 
go at such an intemperate rate. My head is pretty cob- 
webby yet. 

I am hoping that along about this time I shall hear that 
the machine is beginning its test in the Herald office. I 
shall be very glad indeed to know the result of it. I wish 
I could be there. Sincerely yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

Rouen, where Joan met her martyrdom, was only a short 
distance away, and they halted there en route to Paris, where they 
had arranged to spend the winter. The health of Susy Clemens 
was not good, and they lingered in Rouen while Clemens ex- 
plored the old city and incidentally did some writing of another 
sort. In a note to Mr. Rogers he said: " To put in my odd time 
I am writing some articles about Paul Bourget and his Outre- 
Mer chapters— laughing at them and at some of our oracular 
owls who find them important. What the hell makes them 
important, I should like to know!" 

616 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



He was still at Rouen two weeks later and had received en- 
couraging news from Rogers concerning the type-setter, which 
had been placed for trial in the office of the Chicago Herald. 
Clemens wrote: "I can hardly keep from sending a hurrah by 
cable. I would certainly do it if I wasn't superstitious." His 
restraint, though wise, was wasted — the end was near. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

I69 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE, 

Paris, Dec. 22, '04. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — I seemed to be entirely expecting 
your letter, and also prepared and resigned; but Lord, 
it shows how little we know ourselves and how easily we 
can deceive ourselves. It hit me like a thunder-clap. It 
knocked every rag of sense out of my head, and I went 
flying here and there and yonder, not knowing what I 
was doing, and only one clearly defined thought standing 
up visible and substantial out of the crazy storm-drift — 
that my dream of ten years was in desperate peril, and 
out of the 60,000 or 70,000 projects for its rescue that 
came floating through my skull, not one would hold still 
long enough for me to examine it and size it up. Have 
you ever been like that? Not so much so, I reckon. 

There was another clearly defined idea — I must be 
there and see it die. That is, if it must die; and maybe 
if I were there we might hatch up some next-to-impossible 
way to make it take up its bed and take a walk. 

So, at the end of four hours I started, still whirling and 
walked over to the rue Scribe — 4 P. M. — and asked a 
question or two and was told I should be running a big 
risk if I took the 9 P. M. train for London and South- 
ampton; "better come right along at 6.52 per Havre 
special and step aboard the New York all easy and com- 
fortable." Very! and I about two miles from home, with 
no packing done. 

Then it occurred to me that none of these salvation- 
notions that were whirl-winding through my head could 
be examined or made available unless at least a month's 

617 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



time could be secured. So I cabled you, and said to myself 
that I would take the French steamer tomorrow (which 
will be Sim day). 

By bedtime Mrs. Clemens had reasoned me into a 
fairly rational and contented state of mind ; but of course 
it didn't last long. So I went on thinking— -mixing it 
with a smoke in the dressing room once an hour — until 
dawn this morning. Result — a sane resolution ; no matter 
what your answer to my cable might be, I would hold 
still and not sail until I should get an answer to this 
present letter which I am now writing, or a cable answer 
from you saying "Come" or "Remain." 

I have slept 6 hours, my pond has clarified, and I find 
the sediment of my 70,000 projects to be of this character: 

[Several pages of suggestions for reconstructing the machine 
follow.] 

Don't say I'm wild. For really I'm sane again this 
morning. 

I am going right along with Joan, now, and wait un- 
troubled till I hear from you. If you think I can be of the 
least use, cable me "Come." I can write Joan on board 
ship and lose no time. Also I could discuss my plan with 
the publishei for a deluxe Joan, time being an object, for 
some of the pictures could be made over here cheaply and 
quickly, but would cost much time and money in America. 

If the meeting should decide to quit business Jan. 4, 
I'd like to have Stoker stopped from paying in any more 
money, if Miss Harrison doesn't mind that disagreeable 
job. And I'll have to write them, too, of course. 

With love, S. L. Clemens. 

The "Stoker" of this letter was Bram Stoker, long associated 
with Sir Henry Irving. Irving himself had also taken stock in 
the machine. The address, 169 Rue de 1' University, whence 
these letters are written, was the beautiful studio home of the 
artist Pomroy which they had taken for the winter. 

618 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

I69 RUE DE L'UnIVERSITB, 

Paris, Dec. 27, '04. 
Dear Mr. Rogers, — Notwithstanding your heart is 
'•old and hard," you make a body choke up. I know 
you "mean every word you say" and I do take it "in 
the same spirit in which you tender it." I shall keep 
your regard while we two live — that I know; for I shall 
always remember what you have done for me, and that 
will insure me against ever doing anything that could 
forfeit it or impair it. I am 59 years old; yet I never had 
a friend before who put out a hand and tried to pull me 
ashore when he found me in deep waters. 

It is six days or seven days ago that I lived through that 
despairing day, and then through a night without sleep; 
then settled down next day into my right mind (or there- 
abouts,) and wrote you. I put in the rest of that day till 
7 P. M. plenty comfortably enough writing a long chapter 
of my book; then went to a masked ball blacked up as 
Uncle Remus, taking Clara along; and we had a good 
time. I have lost no day since and suffered no discom- 
fort to speak of, but drove my troubles out of my mind 
and had good success in keeping them out — through 
watchfulness. I have done a good week's work and put 
the book a good way ahead in the Great Trial, which is 
the difficult part which requires the most thought and 
carefulness. I cannot see the end of the Trial yet, but 
I am on the road. I am creeping surely toward it. 

1 ' Why not leave them all to me. " My business bothers ? 
I take you by the hand! I jump at the chance! 

I ought to be ashamed and I am trying my best to be 
ashamed — and yet I do jump at the chance in spite of it. 
I don't want to write Irving and I don't want to write 
Stoker. It doesn't seem as if I could. But I can suggest 
something for you to write them; and then if you see that 
I am unwise, you can write them something quite different. 
Now this is my idea: 

1. To return Stoker's $100 to him and keep his stock. 

619 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



2. And tell Irving that when luck turns with me I will 
make good to him what the salvage from the dead Co. 
fails to pay him of his $500. 

P. S. Madam says No, I must face the music. So I 
enclose my effort — to be used if you approve, but not 
otherwise. 

There ! Now if you will alter it to suit your judgment 
and bang away, I shall be eternally obliged. 

We shall try to find a tenant for our Hartford house; 
not an easy matter, for it costs heavily to live in. We 
can never live in it again; though it would break the 
family's hearts if they could believe it. 

Nothing daunts Mrs. 'Clemens or makes the world look 
black to her— which is the reason I haven't drowned 
myself. 

We all send our deepest and warmest greetings to you 
and all of yours and a Happy New Year! 

S. L. Clemens. 

Enclosure: 

My dear Stoker, — I am not dating this because it is 
not to be mailed at present. 

When it reaches you it will mean that there is a hitch 
in my machine-enterprise — a hitch so serious as to make 
it take to itself the aspect of a dissolved dream. This 
letter, then, will contain cheque for the $100 which you 
have paid. And will you tell Irving for me — I can't get 
up courage enough to talk about this misfortune myself, 
except to you, whom by good luck I haven't damaged 
yet — that when the wreckage presently floats ashore be 
will get a good deal of his $500 back; and a dab at a time 
I will make up to him the rest. 

I'm not feeling as fine as I was when I saw you there in 
your home. Please remember me kindly to Mrs. Stoker. 
I gave up that London lecture-project entirely. Had to — 
there's never been a chance since to find the time. 

yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

620 



Digitized by Google 



XXXV 



LETTERS, 1895-96, TO H. H. ROGERS AND OTHERS. FINISH- 
ING "jOAN OP ARC." THE TRIP AROUND THE 
WORLD. DEATH OP SUSY CLEMENS 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

[No date.] 

DEAR MR. ROGERS,— Yours of Dec. 21 has arrived, 
containing the circular to stockholders and I guess 
the Co. will really quit — there doesn't seem to be any other 
wise course. 

There's one thing which makes it difficult for me to 
soberly realize that my ten year dream is actually dis- 
solved; and that is, that it reverses my horoscope. The 
proverb says, "Born lucky, always lucky," and I am very 
superstitious. As a small boy I was notoriously lucky. 
It was usual for one or two of our lads (per annum) to 
get drowned in the Mississippi or in Bear Creek, but I 
was pulled out in a % drowned condition 9 times before 
I learned to swim, and was considered to be a cat in 
disguise. When the "Pennsylvania" blew up and the 
telegraph reported my brother as fatally injured (with 60 
others) but made no mention of me, my uncle said to my 
mother "It means that Sam was somewhere else, after 
being on that boat a year and a half— he was born lucky." 
Yes, I was somewhere else. I am so superstitious that I 
have always been afraid to have business dealings with 
certain relatives and friends of mine because they were 
unlucky people. All my life I have stumbled upon lucky 
chances of large size, and whenever they were wasted it 
was because of my own stupidity and carelessness. And 
11—12 621 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



so I have felt entirely certain that that machine would 
turn up trumps eventually. It disappointed me lot*? of 
times, but I couldn't shake off the confidence of a life-time 
in my luck. 

Well, whatever I get out of the wreckage will be due to 
good luck — the good luck of getting you into the scheme 
— for, but for that, there wouldn't be any wreckage; it 
would be total loss. 

I wish you had been in at the beginning. Then we 
should have had the good luck to step promptly ashore. 

Miss Harrison has had a dream which promises me a 
large bank account, and I want her to go ahead and 
dream it twice more, so as to make the prediction sure 
to be fulfilled. 

I've got a first rate subject for a book. It kept me awake 
all night, and I began it and completed it in my mind. 
The minute I finish Joan I will take it up. 

Love and Happy New Year to you all. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

This was about the end of the machine interests so far as 
Clemens was concerned. Paige succeeded in getting some new 
people interested, but nothing important happened, or that in 
any way affected Mark Twain. Characteristically he put the 
whole matter behind him and plunged into his work, facing com- 
parative poverty and a burden of debts with a stout heart. The 
beginning of the new year found him really poorer in purse 
than he had ever been in his life, but certainly not crushed, or 
even discouraged— at least, not permanently— and never more 
industrious or capable. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

I69 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE, 

Paris, Jan. 23, '9$. 
Dear Mr. Rogers, — After I wrote you, two or three 
days ago I thought I would make a holiday of the rest 
of the day — the second deliberate holiday since I had the 
gout. On the first holiday I wrote a tale of about 6,000 

622 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



words, which was 3 days' work in one; and this time I 
did 8,000 before midnight. I got nothing out of that 
first holiday but the recreation of it, for I condemned the 
work after careful reading and some revision; but this 
time I fared better — I finished the Huck Finn tale that 
lies in your safe, and am satisfied with it. 

The Bacheller syndicate (117 Tribune Building) want 
a story of 5,000 words (lowest limit of their London 
agent) for $1,000 and offer to plank the check on delivery, 
and it was partly to meet that demand that I took that 
other holiday. So as I have no short story that suits me 
(and can't and shan't make promises), the best I can do 
is to offer the longer one which I finished on my second 
holiday — " Tom Sawyer, Detective. 1 * 

It makes 27 or 28,000 words, and is really written for 
grown folks, though I expect young folk to read it, too. 
It transfers to the banks of the Mississippi the incidents 
of a strange murder which was committed in Sweden in old 
times. 

I'll refer applicants for a sight of the story to you or 
Miss Harrison. 1 

Yours sincerely, 

S. L. Clemens. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

I69 RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE, 

Apr. 20, 'QS. 

Dear Mr. Rogers,— Your felicitous delightful letter 
of the 15th arrived three days ago, and brought great 
pleasure into the house. 

There is one thing that weighs heavily on Mrs. Clemens 
and me. That is Brusnahan's money. If he is satisfied 
to have it invested in the Chicago enterprise, well and 
good ; if not, we would like to have the money paid back 
to him. I will give him as many months to decide in as 
he pleases— let him name 6 or 10 or 12 — and we will let 

* Secretary to Mr. Rogers. 
623 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

the money stay where it is in your hands till the time is 
up. Will Miss Harrison tell him so? I mean if you ap- 
prove. I would like him to have a good investment, but 
would meantime prefer to protect him against loss. 

At 6 minutes past 7, yesterday evening, Joan of Arc 
was burned at the stake. 

With the long strain gone, I am in a sort of physical 
collapse today, but it will be gone tomorrow. I judged 
that this end of the book would be hard work, and it 
turned out so. I have never done any work before that 
cost so much thinking and weighing and measuring and 
planning and cramming, or so much cautious and pains- 
taking execution. For I wanted the whole Rouen trial in. 
if it could be got in in such a way that the reader's interest 
would not flag — in fact I wanted the reader's interest to 
increase; and so I stuck to it with that determination 
in view — with the result that I have left nothing out but 
unimportant repetitions. Although it is mere history — 
history pure and simple — history stripped naked of 
flowers, embroideries, colorings, exaggerations, inventions 
— the family agree that I have succeeded. It was a peril- 
ous thing to try in a tale, but I never believed it a doubtful 
one — provided I stuck strictly to business and didn't 
weaken and give up: or didn't get lazy and skimp the 
work. The first two-thirds of the book were easy; for 
I only needed to keep my historical road straight; there- 
fore I used for reference only one French history and one 
English one — and shoveled in as much fancy work and 
invention on both sides of the historical road as I pleased. 
But on this last third I have constantly used five French 
sources and five English ones and I think no telling his- 
torical nugget in any of them has escaped me. 

Possibly the book may not sell, but that is nothing — 
it was written for love. 

There — I'm called to see company. The family seldom 
require this of me, but they know I am not working today. 

Yours sincerely, 

S. L. Clemens. 

624 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



"Brusnahan," of the foregoing letter, was an employee of 
the New York Herald, superintendent of the press-room — who 
had invested some of his savings in the type-setter. 

In February Clemens returned to New York to look after 
matters connected with his failure and to close arrangements 
for a reading-tour around the world. He was nearly sixty years 
old, and time had not lessened his loathing for the platform. 
More than once, however, in earlier years, he had turned to it 
as a debt-payer, and never yet had his burden been so great as 
now. He concluded arrangements with Major Pond to take 
him as far as the Pacific Coast, and with R. S. Smythe, of Aus- 
tralia, for the rest of the tour. In April we find him once more 
back in Paris preparing to bring the family to America. He 
had returned by way of London, where he had visited Stanley 
the explorer— an old friend. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

I69 RUE DE l'UNIVERSITE, 

Sunday, Apr. 7, 'pj. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — . . . Stanley is magnificently 
housed in London, in a grand mansion in the midst of the 
official world, right off Downing Street and Whitehall. 
He had an extraordinary assemblage of brains and fame 
there to meet me — thirty or forty (both sexes) at dinner, 
and more than a hundred came in after dinner. Kept 
it up till after midnight. There were cabinet ministers, 
ambassadors, admirals, generals, canons, Oxford pro- 
fessors, novelists, playwrights, poets, and a number of 
people equipped with rank and brains. I told some yarns 
and made some speeches. I promised to call on all those 
people next time I come to London, and show them the 
wife and the daughters. If I were younger and very 
strong I would dearly love to spend a season in London — 
provided I had no work on hand, or no work more exacting 
than lecturing. I think I will lecture there a month or 
two when I return from Australia. 

There were many delightful ladies in that company. 
One was the wife of His Excellency Admiral Bridge, 
Commander-in Chief of the Australian Station, and she 

625 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



said her husband was able to throw wide all doors to me 
in that part of the world and would be glad to do it, and 
would yacht me and my party around, and excursion us 
in his flag-ship and make us have a great time; and she 
said she would write him we were coming, and we would 
find him ready. I have a letter from her this morning 
enclosing a letter of introduction to the Admiral. I 
already know the Admiral commanding in the China 
Seas and have promised to look in on him out there. He 
sleeps with my books under his pillow. P'raps it is the 
only way he can sleep. 

According to Mrs. Clemens's present plans — subject 
to modification, of course — we sail in May; stay one day, 
or two days in New York, spend June, July and August 
in Elmira and prepare my lectures; then lecture in San 
Francisco and thereabouts during September and sail 
for Australia before the middle of October and open the 
show there about the middle of November. We don't 
take the girls along; it would be too expensive and they 
are quite willing to remain behind anyway. 

Mrs. C. is feeling so well that she is not going to try 
the New York doctor till we have gone around the world 
and robbed it and made the finances a little easier. 

With a power of love to you all, S. L. Clemens. 

There would come moments of depression, of course, and a 
week later he wrote: "I am tired to death all the time." To a 
man of less vitality, less vigor of mind and body, it is easy to 
believe that under such circumstances this condition would 
have remained permanent. But perhaps, after all, it was his 
comic outlook on things in general that was his chief life-saver. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

160 rue de l'Universite, Apr. 20, 'OS- 
Dear Mr. Rogers, — I have been hidden an hour or 
/ two, reading proof of Joan and now I think I am a lost 
child. I can't find anybody on the place. The baggage 
has all disappeared, including the family. I reckon that 
in the hurry and bustle of moving to the hotel they forgot 

626 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



me. But it is no matter. It is peacefuler now than I 
have known it for days and days and days. 

In these Joan proofs which I have been reading for the 
September Harper I find a couple of tip-top platform 
readings — and I mean to read them on our trip. If the 
authorship is known by then ; and if it isn't, I will reveal 
it. The fact is, there is more good platform-stuff in Joan 
than in any previous book of mine, by a long sight. 

Yes, every danged member of the tribe has gone to the 
hotel and left me lost. I wonder how they can be so care- 
less with property. I have got to try to get there by myself 
now. 

All the trunks are going over as luggage; then I've 
got to find somebody on the dock who will agree to ship 
6 of them to the Hartford Customhouse. If it is difficult 
I will dump them into the river. It is very careless of 
Mrs. Clemens to trust trunks and things to me. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

By the latter part of May they were at Quarry Farm, and 
Clemens, laid up there with a carbuncle, was preparing for his 
long tour. The outlook was not a pleasant one. To Mr. Rogers 
he wrote: "I sha'n't be able to stand on the platform before we 
start west. I sha'n't get a single chance to practice my reading; 
but will have to appear in Cleveland without the essential prep- 
aration. Nothing in this world can save it from being a shabby, 
poor disgusting performance. I've got to stand; I can't do 
it and talk to a house, and how in the nation am I going to sit? 
Land of Goshen, it's this night week! Pray for me." 

The opening at Cleveland July 15th appears not to have been 
much of a success, though from another reason, one that doubt- 
less seemed amusing to him later. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

(Forenoon) 
Cleveland, July i6 t *q$. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — Had a roaring success at the 
Elmira reformatory Sunday night. But here, last night, 

627 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I suffered defeat— There were a couple of hundred little 
boys behind me on the stage, on a lofty tier of benches 
which made them the most conspicuous objects in the 
house. And there was nobody to watch them or keep 
them quiet. Why, with their scufflings and horse-play 
and noise, it was just a menagerie. Besides, a concert of 
amateurs had been smuggled into the program (to precede 
me,) and their families and friends (say ten per cent of 
the audience) kept encoring them and they always re- 
sponded. So it was 20 minutes to 9 before I got the plat- 
form in front of those 2,600 people who had paid a dollar 
apiece for a chance to go to hell in this fashion. 

I got started magnificently, but inside of half an hour 
the scuffling boys had the audience's maddened attention 
and I saw it was a gone case; so I skipped a third of my 
program and quit. The newspapers are kind, but between 
you and me it was a defeat. There ain't going to be any 
more concerts at my lectures. I care nothing for this 
defeat, because it was not my fault. My first half hour 
showed that I had the house, and I could have kept it if 
I hadn't been so handicapped. 

Yours sincerely, 

S. L. Clemens. 

P. S. Had a satisfactory time at Petoskey. Crammed 
the house and turned away a crowd. We had $548 in the 
house, which was $300 more than it had ever had in it 
before. I believe I don't care to have a talk go off better 
than that one did. 

Mark Twain, on this long tour, was accompanied by his wife 
and his daughter Clara — Susy and Jean Clemens remaining 
with their aunt at Quarry Farm. The tour was a financial 
success from the start. By the time they were ready to sail 
from Vancouver five thousand dollars had been remitted to Mr. 
Rogers against that day of settlement when the debts of Webster 
& Co. were to be paid. Perhaps it should be stated here that a 
legal settlement had been arranged on a basis of fifty cents on 
the dollar, but neither Clemens nor his wife consented to this 
as final. They would pay in full. 

628 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



They sailed from Vancouver August 23, 1895. About the 
only letter of this time is an amusing note to Rudyard Kipling, 
written at the moment of departure. 

To Rudyard Kipling, in England: 

August, 1895. 

Dear Kipling,— It is reported that you are about to 
visit India. This has moved me to journey to that far 
country in order that I may unload from my conscience 
a debt long due to you. Years ago you came from India 
to Elmira to visit me, as you said at the time. It has 
always been my purpose to return that visit and that 
great compliment some day. I shall arrive next January 
and you must be ready. I shall come riding my ayah with 
his tusks adorned with silver bells and ribbons and es- 
corted by a troop of native howdahs richly clad and 
mounted upon a herd of wild bungalows; and you must 
be on hand with a few bottles of ghee, for I shall be 

thirst y- Affectionately, 

Clemens, platforming in Australia, was too busy to write 
letters. Everywhere he was welcomed by great audiences, and 
everywhere lavishly entertained. He was beset by other car- 
buncles, but would seem not to have been seriously delayed by 
them. A letter to his old friend Twicheil carries the story. 

To Rev. Jos. H. Twicheil in Hartford: 

Frank Moeller's Masonic Hotel, 

Napier, New Zealand, 

November 20 1 *g$. 

Dear Job, — Your welcome letter of two months and 
five days ago has just arrived, and finds me in bed with 
another carbuncle. It is No. 3. Not a serious one this 
time. I lectured last night without inconvenience, but 
the doctors thought best to forbid to-night's lecture. My 
second one kept me in bed a week in Melbourne. 

. . . We are all glad it is you who is to write the article, 
it delights us all through. 

629 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I think it was a good stroke of luck that knocked me 
on my back here at Napier, instead of some hotel in the 
centre of a noisy city. Here we have the smooth and 
placidly-complaining sea at our door, with nothing between 
us and it but 20 yards of shingle — and hardly a suggestion 
of life in that space to mar it or make a noise. Away down 
here fifty-five degrees south of the Equator this sea seems 
to murmur in an unfamiliar tongue — a foreign tongue — 
a tongue bred among the ice-fields of the Antarctic: — a 
murmur with a note of melancholy in it proper to the 
vast unvisited solitudes it has come from. It was very 
delicious and solacing to wake in the night and find it 
still pulsing there. I wish you were here — land, but it 
would be fine! 

Livy and Clara enjoy this nomadic life pretty well; 
certainly better than one could have expected they would. 
They have tough experiences, in the way of food and 
beds and frantic little ships, but they put up with the 
worst that befalls with heroic endurance that resembles 
contentment. 

No doubt I shall be on the platform next Monday. A 
week later we shall reach Wellington ; talk there 3 nights, 
then sail back to Australia. We railed for New Zealand 
October 30. 

Day before yesterday was Livy's birthday (under 
world time), and tomorrow will be mine. I shall be 60 — 
no thanks for it. 

I and the others send worlds and worlds of love to all 
you dear ones. Mark. 



The article mentioned in the foregoing letter was one which 
Twichell had been engaged by Harper's Magazine to write con- 
cerning the home life and characteristics of Mark Twain. By 
the time the Clemens party had completed their tour of India 
— a splendid, triumphant tour, too full of work and recreation 
for letter-writing — and had reached South Africa, the article 
had appeared, a satisfactory one, if we may judge by Mark 
Twain's next. 

630 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



This letter, however, has a special interest in the account it 
gives of Mark Twain's visit to the Jameson raiders, then im- 
prisoned at Pretoria. 

To Rev. Jos. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Pretoria, South African Republic, 

The Queen's Birthday, *o6. 

(May 24) 

Dear old Joe, — Harper for May was given to me 
yesterday in Johannesburg by an American lady who 
lives there, and I read your article on me while coming 
up in the train with her and an old friend and fellow- 
Missourian of mine, Mrs. John Hays Hammond, the 
handsome and spirited wife of the chief of the 4 Reformers, 
who lies in prison here under a 15-year sentence, along 
with 50 minor Reformers who are in for 1 and 5-year 
terms. Thank you a thousand times Joe, you have 
praised me away above my deserts, but I am not the man 
to quarrel with you for that; and as for Livy, she will 
take your very hardiest statements at par, and be grateful 
to you to the bottom of her heart. Between you and 
Punch and Brander Matthews, I am like to have my 
opinion of myself raised sufficiently high; and I guess 
the children will be after you, for it is the study of their 
lives to keep my self -appreciation down somewhere within 
bounds. 

I had a note from Mrs. Rev. Gray (nee Tyler) yesterday, 
and called on her to-day. She is well. 

Yesterday I was allowed to enter the prison with Mrs. 
Hammond. A Boer guard was at my elbow all the time, 
but was courteous and polite, only he barred the way in 
the compound (quadrangle or big open court) and wouldn't 
let me cross a white mark that was on the ground — the 
* 4 death-line ' ' one of t he prisoners called it. Not in earnest, 
though, I think. I found that I had met Hammond once 
when he was a Yale senior and a guest of Gen. Franklin's. 
I also found that I had known Capt. Mein intimately 32 
years ago. One of the English prisoners had heard me 

631 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



lecture in London 23 years ago. After being introduced 
in turn to all the prisoners, I was allowed to see some 
of the cells and examine their food, beds, etc. I was told 
in Johannesburg that Hammond's salary of $150,000 a 
year is not stopped, and that the salaries of some of the 
others are still continued. Hammond was looking very 
well indeed, and I can say the same of all the others, 
When the trouble first fell upon them it hit some of them 
very hard; several fell sick (Hammond among them), two 
or three had to be removed to the hospital, and one of the 
favorites lost his mind and killed himself, poor fellow, last 
week. His funeral, with a sorrowing following of 10,000, 
took the place of the public demonstration the Americans 
were getting up for me. 

These prisoners are strong men, prominent men, and 
I believe they are all educated men. They are well off; 
some of them are wealthy. They have a lot of books to 
read, they play games and smoke, and for awhile they will 
be able to bear up in their captivity; but not for long, not 
for very long, I take it. I am told they have times of 
deadly brooding and depression. I made them a speech — 
sitting down. It just happened so. I don't prefer that 
attitude. Still, it has one advantage — it is only a talk, 
it doesn't take the form of a speech. I have tried it once 
before on this trip. However, if a body wants to make 
sure of having "liberty," and feeling at home, he had 
better stand up, of course. I advised them at considerable 
length to stay where they were — they would get used to 
it and like it presently; if they got out they would only 
get in again somewhere else, by the look of their coun- 
tenances; and I promised to go and see the President and 
do what I could to get him to double their jail-terms. 

We had a very good sociable time till the permitted 
time was up and a little over, and we outsiders had to go. 
I went again to-day, but the Rev. Mr. Gray had just 
arrived, and the warden, a genial, elderly Boer named 
Du Plessisex, plained that his orders wouldn't allow him 
to admit saint and sinner at the same time, particularly 

632 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



on a Sunday. Du Plessis — descended from the Huguenot 
fugitives, you see, of 200 years ago — but he hasn't any 
French left in him now — all Dutch. 

It gravels me to think what a goose I was to make 
Livy and Clara remain in Durban ; but I wanted to save 
them the 30-hour railway trip to Johannesburg. And 
Durban and its climate and opulent foliage were so 
lovely, and the friends there were so choice and so hearty 
that I sacrificed myself in their interests, as I thought. It 
is just the beginning of winter, and although the days are 
hot, the nights are cool. But it's lovely weather in these 
regions, too; and the friends are as lovely as the weather, 
and Johannesburg and Pretoria are brimming with interest. 
I talk here twice more, then return to Johannesburg next 
Wednesday for a fifth talk there; then to the Orange Free 
State capital, then to some town on the way to Port 
Elizabeth, where the two will join us by sea from Durban ; 
then the gang will go to Kimberley and presently to the 
Cape — and so, in the course of time, we shall get through 
and sail for England; and then we will hunt up a quiet 
village and I will write and Livy edit, for a few months, 
while Clara and Susy and Jean study music and things 
in London. 

We have had noble good times everywhere and every 
day, from Cleveland, July 15, to Pretoria, May 24, and 
never a dull day either on sea or land, notwithstanding 
the carbuncles and things. Even when I was laid up 10 
days at Jeypore in India we had the charmingest times 
with English friends. All over India the English — well, 
you will never know how good and fine they are till you 
see them. 

Midnight and after! and I must do many things to-day, 
and lecture to-night. 

A world of thanks to you, Joe dear, and a world of love 
to all of you. Mark. 

Perhaps for readers of a later day a word as to what con- 
stituted the Jameson raid would not be out of place here. Dr. 

633 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Leander Starr Jameson was an English physician, located at 
Kimberley. President Kruger (Oom Paul), head of the South 
African Republic, was one of his patients; also, Lobengula, 
the Matabeie chief. From Lobengula concessions were obtained 
which led to the formation of the South African Company. 
Jameson gave up his profession and went in for conquest, as- 
sociating himself with the projects of Cecil Rhodes. In time he 
became administrator of Rhodesia. By the end of 1894 he was 
in high feather, and during a visit to England was feted as a 
sort of romantic conqueror of the olden time. Perhaps this 
turned his head; at all events at the end of 1895 came the 
startling news that " Dr. Jim," as he was called, at the head of 
six hundred men, had ridden into the Transvaal in support of a 
Rhodes scheme for an uprising at Johannesburg. The raid was 
a failure. Jameson, and those other knights of adventure, were 
captured by the forces of "Oom Paul," and some of them barely 
escaped execution. The Boer president handed them over to 
the English Government for punishment, and they received 
varying sentences, but all were eventually released. Jameson, 
later, became again prominent in South-African politics, but 
there is no record of any further raids. 



The Clemens party sailed from South Africa the middle of 
July, 1896, and on the last day of the month reached England. 
They had not planned to return to America, but to spend the 
winter in or near London in some quiet place where Clemens 
could write the book of his travels. 

The two daughters in America, Susy and Jean, were expected 
to arrive August 12th, but on that day there came, instead, a 
letter saying that Susy Clemens was not well enough to sail. 
A cable inquiry was immediately sent, but the reply when it 
came was not satisfactory, and Mrs. Clemens and Clara sailed 
for America without further delay. This was on August 15th. 
Three days later, in the old home at Hartford, Susy Clemens 
died of cerebral fever. She had been visiting Mrs. Charles 
Dudley Warner, but by the physician's advice had been re- 
moved to the comfort and quiet of her own home, only a few 
steps away. 

Mark Twain, returning from his triumphant tour of the world 
in the hope that soon, now, he might be free from debt, with his 
family happily gathered about him, had to face alone this cruel 

634 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



blow. There was no purpose in his going to America; Susy 
would be buried long before his arrival. He awaited in England 
the return of his broken family. They lived that winter in a 
quiet corner of Chelsea, No. 23 Tedworth Square. 

To Rev. Joseph H. TwicheU, in Hartford, Conn.: 

Permanent address: 

% Chatto & Winmjs 
in t. Martin's Lank, London, 

Sept. 27, '06. 

Through Livy and Katy I have learned, dear old Joe, 
how loyally you stood poor Susy's friend, and mine, and 
Livy's: how you came all the way down, twice, from your 
refuge on your merciful errands to bring the 
peace and comfort of your beloved presence, first to that 
poor child, and again to the broken heart of her poor 
desolate mother. It was like you; like your good great 
heart, like your matchless and unmatchable self. It was 
no surprise to me to learn that you stayed by Susy long 
hours, careless of fatigue and heat, it was no surprise to 
me to learn that you could still the storms that swept 
her spirit when no other could; for she loved you, revered 
you, trusted you, and "Uncle Joe" was no empty phrase 
upon her lips! I am grateful to you, Joe, grateful to the 
bottom of my heart, which has always been filled with 
love for you, and respect and admiration; and I would 
have chosen you out of all the world to take my place 
at Susy's side and Livy's in those black hours. 

Susy was a rare creature; the rarest that has been 
reared in Hartford in this generation. And Livy knew it, 
and you knew it, and Charley Warner and George, and 
Harmony, and the Hillyers and the Dunhams and the 
Cheneys, and Susy and Lilly, and the Bunces, and Henry 
Robinson and Dick Burton, and perhaps others. And I 
also was of the number, but not in the same degree — for 
she was above my duller comprehension. I merely knew 
that she was my superior in fineness of mind, in the delicacy 
and subtlety of her intellect, but to fully measure her I 

635 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



was not competent. I know her better now; for I have 
read her private writings and sounded the deeps of her 
mind; and I know better, now, the treasure that was 
mine than I knew it when I had it. But I have this 
consolation: that dull as I was, I always knew enough to 
be proud when she commended me or my work — as proud 
as if Livy had done it herself — and I took it as the accolade 
from the hand of genius. I see now — as Livy always saw — 
that she had greatness in her; and that she herself was 
dimly conscious of it. 

And now she is dead — and I can never tell her. 

God bless you Joe— and all of your house. 

S. L. C. 

To Mr. Henry C. Robinson, Hartford, Conn.: 

London, Sept. 28, *o6. 

It is as you say, dear old friend, "the pathos of it'* — 
yes, it was a piteous thing — as piteous a tragedy as any 
the year can furnish. When we started westward upon 
our long trip at half past ten at night, July 14, 1895, at 
Elmira, Susy stood on the platform in the blaze of the 
electric light waving her good-byes to us as the train 
glided away, her mother throwing back kisses and watch- 
ing her through her tears. One year, one month, and one 
week later, Clara and her mother having exactly com- 
pleted the circuit of the globe, drew up at that plat- 
form at the same hour of the night, in the same train 
and the same car — and again Susy had come a journey 
and was near at hand to meet them. She was waiting in 
the house she was born in, in her coffin. 

All the circumstances of this death were pathetic — 
my brain is worn to rags rehearsing them. The mere 
death would have been cruelty enough, without over- 
loading it and emphasizing it with that score of harsh 
and wanton details. The child was taken away when her 
mother was within three days of her, and would have 
given three decades for sight of her. 

636 



Digitized by Google 




MARK TWAIN IN 189ft, AFTER HIS RF.TI'RN FROM Hl> TOl R AROl Nh 

THE WORLD 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



In my despair and unassuageable misery I upbraid myself 
for ever parting with her. But there is no use in that. 
Since it was to happen it would have happened. 

With love S. L. C. 

The life at Tedworth Square that winter was one of almost 
complete privacy. Of the hundreds of friends which Mark 
Twain had in London scarcely half a dozen knew his address. 
He worked steadily on his book of travels, Following the Equator, 
and wrote few letters beyond business communications to Mr. 
Rogers. In one of these he said, " I am appalled! Here I am 
trying to load you up with work again after you have been 
dray-horsing over the same tiresome ground for a year. It's 
too bad, and I am ashamed of it." 

But late in November he sent a letter of a different sort — 
one that was to have an important bearing on the life of a girl 
to-day of unique and world-wide distinction. 

To Mrs. H. H. Rogers, in New York City: 

For and in behalf 
of Helen Keller, 
stone blind and deaf, 
and formerly dumb. 

Dear Mrs. Rogers, — Experience has convinced me 
that when one wishes to set a hard-worked man at some- 
thing which he mightn't prefer to be bothered with, it 
is best to move upon him behind his wife. If she can't 
convince him it isn't worth while for other people to try. 

Mr. Rogers will remember our visit with that astonishing 
girl at Laurence Hutton's house when she was fourteen 
years old. Last July, in Boston, when she was 16 she 
underwent the Harvard examination for admission to 
Radcliffe College. She passed without a single condition. 
She was allowed the same amount of time that is granted 
to other applicants, and this was shortened in her case 
by the fact that the question papers had to be read to her. 
Yet she scored an average of 90 as against an average of 
78 on the part of the other applicants. 

11.— 13 637 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It won't do for America to allow this marvelous child 
to retire from her studies because of poverty. If she can 
go on with them she will make a fame that will endure in 
history for centuries. Along her special lines she is the 
most extraordinary product of all the ages. 

There is danger that she must retire from the struggle 
for a College degree for lack of support for herself and for 
Miss Sullivan, (the teacher who has been with her from 
the start — Mr. Rogers will remember her.) Mrs. Hutton 
writes to ask me to interest rich Englishmen in her case, 
and I would gladly try, but my secluded life will not per- 
mit it. I see nobody. Nobody knows my address. Nothing 
but the strictest hiding can enable me to write my long 
book in time. 

So I thought of this scheme: Beg you to lay siege to 
your husband and get him to interest himself and Mess. 
John D. and William Rockefeller and the other Standard 
Oil chiefs in Helen's case; get them to subscribe an annual 
aggregate of six or seven hundred or a thousand dollars — 
and agree to continue this for three or four years, until 
she has completed her college course. I'm not trying to 
limit their generosity — indeed no, they may pile that 
Standard Oil, Helen Keller College Fund as high as they 
please, they have my consent. 

Mrs. Hutton's idea is to raise a permanent fund the 
interest upon which shall support Helen and her teacher 
and put them out of the fear of want. I shan't say a word 
against it, but she will find it a difficult and disheartening 
job, and meanwhile what is to become of that miraculous 
girl? 

No, for immediate and sound effectiveness, the thing is 
for you to plead with Mr. Rogers for this hampered wonder 
of your sex, and send him clothed with plenary powers 
to plead with the other chiefs — they have spent mountains 
of money upon the worthiest benevolences, and I think 
that the same spirit which moved them to put their hands 
down through their hearts into their pockets in those cases 
will answer "Here!" when its name is called in this one. 

638 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



There — I don't need to apologize to you or to H. H. for 
this appeal that I am making; I know you too well for 
that. 

Good-bye with love to all of you — 



Laurence Hutton is on the staff of Harper's Monthly — 
close by, and handy when wanted. 

The plea was not made in vain. Mr. and Mrs. Rogers in- 
terested themselves most liberally in Helen Keller's fortune, and 
certainly no one can say that any of those who contributed to 
her success ever had reason for disappointment. 

In his letter of grateful acknowledgment, which follows, 
Clemens also takes occasion to thank Mr. Rogers for his further 
efforts in the matter of his own difficulties. This particular 
reference concerns the publishing complications which by this 
time had arisen between the American Publishing Company, of 
Hartford, and the house in Franklin Square. 

London, Dec. 22, *o6. 
Dear Mrs. Rogers, — It is superb! And I am beyond 
measure grateful to you both. I knew you would be in- 
terested in that wonderful girl, and that Mr. Rogers was 
already interested in her and touched by her; and I was 
sure that if nobody else helped her you two would; but 
you have gone far and away beyond the sum I expected— 
may your lines fall in pleasant places here and Hereafter 
for it I 

The Huttons are as glad and grateful as they can be, 
and I am glad for their sokes as well as for Helen's. 

I want to thank Mr. Rogers for crucifying himself 
again on the same old cross between Bliss and Harper; 
and goodness knows I hope he will come to enjoy it above 
all other dissipations yet, seeing that it has about it the 
elements of stability and permanency. However, at any 
time that he says sign, we're going to do it. 

Ever sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 



S. L. Clemens. 




Digitized by Google 



XXXVI 

LETTERS 1897. LONDON, SWITZERLAND, VIENNA 

MARK TWAIN worked steadily on his book that sad 
winter and managed to keep the gloom out of his chap- 
ters, though it is noticeable that Following the Equator is more 
serious than his other books of travel. He wrote few letters, 
and these only to his three closest friends, Howells, Twichell, 
and Rogers. In the letter to Twichell, which follows, there is 
mention of two unfinished manuscripts which he expects to 
resume. One of these was a dream story, enthusiastically begun, 
but perhaps with insufficient plot to carry it through, for it 
never reached conclusion. He had already tried it in one or 
two forms and would begin it again presently. The identity of 
the other tale is uncertain. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

London, Jan. /p, '97. 
Dear Joe— Do I want you to write to me? Indeed I 
do. I do not want most people to write, but I do want you 
to do it. The others break my heart, but you will not 
You have a something divine in you that is not in other 
men. You have the touch that beals, not lacerates. And 
you know the secret places of our hearts. You know our 
life — the outside of it— as the others do — and the inside 
of it— which they do not. You have seen our whole 
voyage. You have seen us go to sea, a cloud of sail, and 
the flag at the peak; and you see us now, chartless, adrift 
— derelicts; battered, water-logged, our sails a ruck of 
rags, our pride gone. For it is gone. And there is nothing 
in its place. The vanity of life was all we had, and there 
is no more vanity left in us. We are even ashamed of that 

640 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



we had ; ashamed that we trusted the promises of life and 
builded high— to come to this! 

I did know that Susy was part of us ; I did not know that 
she could go away; I did not know that she could go away, 
and take our lives with her. yet leave our dull bodies 
behind. And I did not know what she was. To me she 
was but treasure in the bank : the amount known, the need 
to look at it daily, handle it, weigh it, count it, realize 
it, not necessary; and now that I would do it, it is too 
late; tbey tell me it is not there, has vanished away in a 
night, the bank is broken, my fortune is gone, I am a 
pauper. How am I to comprehend this? How am I to 
have it? Why am I robbed, and who is benefited? 

Ah, well, Susy died at home. She had that privilege. 
Her dying eyes rested upon nothing that was strange to 
them, but only upon things which they had known and 
loved always and which had made her young years glad; 
and she had you, and Sue, and Katy, and John, and Ellen. 
This was happy fortune — I am thankful that it was 
vouchsafed to her. If she had died in another house — well, 
I think I could not have borne that. To us, our house was 
not tin sentient matter — it had a heart, and a soul, and 
eyes to see us with ; and approvals, and solicitudes, and 
deep sympathies; it was of us, and we were in its confi- 
dence, and lived in its grace and in the peace of its bene- 
diction. We never came home from an absence that its 
face did not light up and speak out its eloquent welcome 
— and we could not enter it unmoved. And could we now, 
oh, now, in spirit we should enter it unshod. 

I am trying to add to the "assets" which you estimate 
so generously. No, I am not. The thought is not in my 
mind. My purpose is other. I am working, but it is 
for the sake of the work— the " surcease of sorrow " that 
is found there. I work all the days, and trouble vanishes 
away when I use that magic. This book will not long 
stand between it and me, now; but that is no matter, 
I have many unwritten books to fly to for my (grjsgrjia^ 
tion; the interval between the finishing of this one and 

641 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

the beginning of the next will not be more than an hour, 
at most. Continuances \ I mean; for two of them are 
already well along — in fact have reached exactly the same 
stage in their journey: 19,000 words each. The present 
one will contain 180,000 words — 130,000 are done. I 
am well protected; but Livy! She has nothing in the 
world to turn to; nothing but housekeeping, and doing 
things for the children and me. She does not see people, 
and cannot; books have lost their interest for her. She 
sits solitary; and all the day, and all the days, wonders 
how it all happened, and why. We others were always 
busy with our affairs, but Susy was her comrade — had to 
be driven from her loving persecutions — sometimes at 1 
in the morning. To Livy the persecutions were welcome. 
It was heaven to her to be plagued like that. But it is 
ended now. Livy stands so in need of help; and none 
among us all could help her like you. 

Some day you and I will walk again, Joe, and talk. I 
hope so. We could have such talks! We are all grateful 
to you and Harmony — how grateful it is not given to us 
to say in words. We pay as we can. in love; and in this 
coin practicing no economy. Good bye, dear old Joe! 

Mark. 

The letters to Mr. Rogers were, for the most part, on matters 
of business, but in one of them he said: "I am going to write 
with all my might on this book, and follow it up with others as 
fast as I can in the hope that within three years I can clear out 
the stuff that is in me waiting to be written, and that I shall then 
die in the promptest kind of a way and no fooling around." 
And in one he wrote: "You are the best friend ever a man had. 
and the surest." 

To W. D. HoweUs, in New York: 

London, Feb. 2j, f p7- 
Dear Howells,— I find your generous article in the 
Weekly, and I want to thank you for its splendid praises, 

so daringly uttered and so warmly. The words stir the 

642 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



dead heart of me, and throw a glow of color into a life 
which sometimes seems to have grown wholly wan. I 
don't mean that I am miserable; no — worse than that — 
indifferent. Indifferent to nearly ever^hing but work. 
I like that; I enjoy it, and stick to it. I do it without pur- 
pose and without ambition ; merely for the love of it. 

This mood will pass, some day — there is history for it. 
But it cannot pass until my wife comes up out of the 
submergence. She was always so quick to recover herself 
before, but now there is no rebound, and we are dead 
people who go through the motions of life. Indeed I am 
a mud image, and it will puzzle me to know what it is in 
me that writes, and has comedy-fancies and finds pleasure 
in phrasing them. It is a law of our nature, of course, or 
it wouldn't happen ; the thing in me forgets the presence 
of the mud image and goes its own way, wholly uncon- 
scious of it and apparently of no kinship with it. I have 
finished my book, but I go on as if the end were indefinitely 
away— as indeed it is. There is no hurry— at any rate 
there is no limit. 

Jean's spirits are good; Clara's are rising. They have 
youth — the only thing that was worth giving to the race. 

These are sardonic times. Look at Greece, and that 
whole shabby muddle. But I am not sorry to be alive and 
privileged to look on. If I were not a hermit I would go 
to the House every day and see those people scuffle over it 
and blether about the brotherhood of the human race. 
This has been a bitter year for English pride, and I don't 
like to see England humbled— that is, not too much. We 
are sprung from her loins, and it hurts me. I am for 
republics, and she is the only comrade we've got, in that. 
We can't count France, and there is hardly enough of 
Switzerland to count. Beneath the governing crust Eng- 
jsA is sour.d-hear.ed — arid sinc-rc, too, and Dearly 
straight. But I am appalled to notice that the wide 
extension of the surface has damaged her manners, and 
rv.her Americanly ur.c/jr- r r, ♦.;.<• lower 

^43 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Won't you give our love to the Howellses all and par- 
ticular ? Sincerely yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

The travel-book did not finish easily, and more than once 
when he thought it completed he found it necessary to cut and 
add and change. The final chapters were not sent to the printer 
until the middle of May, and in a letter to Mr. Rogers he com- 
mented: "A successful book is not made of what is in it, but 
what is left out of it." Clemens was at the time contemplating 
a uniform edition of his books, and in one of his letters to Mr. 
Rogers on the matter he wrote, whimsically, "Now / was pro- 
posing to make a thousand sets at a hundred dollars a set, and 
do the whole canvassing myself. ... I would load up every im- 
portant jail and saloon in America with de luxe editions of my 
books. But Mrs. Clemens and the children object to this, I 
do not know why." And, in a moment of depression: "You 
see the lightning refuses to strike me — there is where the defect 
is. We have to do our own striking as Barney Barnato did. But 
nobody ever gets the courage until he goes crazy." 

They went to Switzerland for the summer to the village of 
Weggis, on Lake Lucerne — "The charmingest place we ever 
lived in," he declared, "for repose, and restfulness, and superb 
scenery." It was here that he began work on a new story of 
Tom and Huck, and at least upon one other manuscript. From a 
brief note to Mr. Rogers we learn something of his employments 
and economies. 

To Henry H. Rogers, in New York: 

Lucerne, August the something or other, 1807. 

Dear Mr. Rogers, — I am writing a novel, and am 
getting along very well with it. 

I believe that this place (Weggis, half an hour from 
Lucerne,) is the loveliest in the world, and the most 
satisfactory. We have a small house on the hillside all 
to ourselves, and our meals are served in it from the inn 
below on the lake shore. Six francs a day per head, house 
and food included. The scenery is beyond comparison 
beautiful. We have a row boat and some bicycles, and 

644 

■ 

Digitized by Google 



TEDWORTH SOI ARE, LONDON MARK TWAIN's STUDY AT WEGGIS, 

lltjute cxxrupiH by the Clemens family. SWITZERLAND, I H97 

winter of 1 ftoo-7 



* 




PENSION AT WEGCIS, SWITZERLAND 
Occupied by the Clemens family summer >.f ih.,; 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Goog 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



good roads, and no visitors. Nobody knows we are here. 
And Sunday in heaven is noisy compared to this quietness. 

Sincerely yours S. L. C. 

To Rev. J. H. Twtcltcll, in Hartford: 

Lucerne, Aug. 22, '07. 

Dear Joe,— Livy made a noble find on the Lucerne 
boat the other day on one of her shopping trips— George 
Williamson Smith — did I tell you about it? We had a 
lovely time with him, and such intellectual refreshment as 
we had not tasted in many a month. 

And the other night we had a detachment of the Jubilee 
Singers — 6. I had known one of them in London 24 years 
ago. Three of the 6 were born in slavery, the others were 
children of slaves. How charming they were — in spirit, 
manner, language, pronunciation, enunciation, grammar, 
phrasing, matter, carriage, clothes— in every detail that 
goes to make the real lady and gentleman, and welcome 
guest. We went down to the village hotel and bought 
our tickets and entered the beer-hall, where a crowd of 
German and Swiss men and women sat grouped at round 
tables with their beer mugs in front of them — self-con- 
tained and unimpressionable looking people, an indifferent 
and unposted and disheartened audience— and up at the 
far end of the room sat the Jubilees in a row. The Singers 
got up and stood — the talking and glass jingling went on. 
Then rose and swelled out above those common earthly 
sounds one of those rich chords the secret of whose make 
only the Jubilees possess, and a sjxjII fell upon that house. 
It was fine to see the faces light up with the pleased 
wonder and surprise of it. No one was indifferent any 
more; and when the singers finished, the camp was 
theirs. It was a triumph. It reminded me of Launcelot 
riding in Sir Kay's armor and astonishing complacent 
Knights who thought they had struck a soft thing. The 
Jubilees sang a lot of pieces. Arduous and painstaking 
cultivation has not diminished or artificialized their music, 

645 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



but on the contrary — to my surprise — has mightily rein- 
forced its eloquence and beauty. Away back in the 
beginning — to my mind — their music made all other vocal 
music cheap; and that early notion is emphasized now. 
It is utterly beautiful, to me; and it moves me infinitely 
more than any other music can. I think that in the 
Jubilees and their songs America has produced the per- 
fectest flower of the ages; and I wish it were a foreign 
product, so that she would worship it and lavish money 
on it and go properly crazy over it. 

Now, these countries are different: they would do all 
that, if it were native. It is true they praise God, but that 
is merely a formality, and nothing in it; they open out 
their whole hearts to no foreigner. 

The musical critics of the German press praise the 
Jubilees with great enthusiasm — acquired technique etc, 
included. 

One of the Jubilee men is a son of General Joe Johnson, 
and was educated by him after the war. The party came 
up to the house and we had a pleasant time. 

This is paradise, here — but of course we have got to 
leave it by and by. The 18th of August 1 has come and 
gone, Joe— and we still seem to live. 

With love from us all. Mark. 

Clemens declared he would as soon spend his life in Weggis 
"as anywhere else in the geography," but October found them 
in Vienna for the winter, at the Hotel Metropole. The Austrian 
capital was just then in a political turmoil, the character of 
which is hinted in the following: 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Hotel Metropole, 
Vienna, Oct. 23, '97. 

Dear Joe, — We are gradually getting settled down and 
wonted. Vienna is not a cheap place to live in, but I have 

1 Anniversary of Susy Clemens's death. 

646 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



made one small arrangement which has a distinctly 
economical aspect. The Vice Consul made the contract 
for me yesterday — to- wit: a barber is to come every 
morning 8.30 and shave me and keep my hair trimmed 
for $2. 50 a month. I used to pay $1.50 per shave in our 
house in Hartford. 

Does it suggest to you reflections when you reflect that 
this is the most important event which has happened to 
me in ten days— unless I count-in my handing a cabman 
over to the police day before yesterday, with the proper 
formalities, and promised to appear in court when his 
case comes up. 

If I had time to run around and talk, I would do it; 
for there is much politics agoing, and it would be interest- 
ing if a body could get the hang of it. It is Christian and 
Jew by the horns* — the advantage with the superior man, 
as usual — the superior man being the Jew every time and 
in all countries. Land, Joe, what chance would the 
Christian have in a country where there were 3 Jews to 
10 Christians! Oh, not the shade of a shadow of a 
chance. The difference between the brain of the average 
Christian and that of the average Jew — certainly in 
Europe — is about the difference between a tadpole's 
and an Archbishop's. It's a marvelous race — by long 
odds the most marvelous that the world has produced, 
1 suppose. 

And there's more politics— the clash between Czech and 
Austrian. I wish I could understand these quarrels, but 
of course I can't. 

With the abounding love of us all 

Mark. 

In Following the Equator there was used an amusing picture 
showing Mark Twain on his trip around the world. It was a 
trick photograph made from a picture of Mark Twain taken in a 
steamer-chair, cut out and combined with a dilapidated negro- 
cart drawn by a horse and an ox. In it Clemens appears to 
be sitting luxuriously in the end of the disreputable cart. His 

647 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

companions are two negroes. To the creator of this in- 
genious effect Mark Twain sent a characteristic acknowledg- 
ment. 




To T. S. Frisbie: 

Vienna, Oct. 25, y gy. 
Mr. T. S. Frisbie —Dear Sir: The picture has reached 
me, and has moved me deeply. That' was a steady, sym- 
pathetic and honorable team, and although it was not 

648 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



• swift, and not fhowy, it pulled me around the globe suc- 
cessfully, and always attracted its proper share of atten- 
tion, even in the midst of the most costly and fashionable 
turnouts. Princes and dukes and other experts were 
always enthused by the harness and could hardly keep 
from trying to buy it. The barouche does not look as 
fine, now, as it did earlier — but that was before the 
earthquake. 

The portraits of myself and uncle and nephew are very 
good indeed, and your impressionist reproduction of the 
palace of the Governor General of India is accurate and 
full of tender feeling. 

I consider that this picture is much more than a work 
of art. How much more, one cannot say with exactness, 
but I should think two-thirds more. 

Very truly yours 

Mark Twain. 

Following the Equator was issued by subscription through 
Mark Twain's old publishers, the Blisses, of Hartford. The sale 
of it was large, not only on account of the value of the book 
itself, but also because of the sympathy of the American people 
with Mark Twain's brave struggle to pay his debts. When the 
newspapers began to print exaggerated stories of the vast profits 
that were piling up, Bliss became worried, for he thought 
it would modify the sympathy. He cabled Clemens for a denial, 
with the following result: 

To Frank E. Bliss, in Hartford; 

Vienna, Nov. 4, 1807. 
Dear Bliss, — Your cablegram informing me that a 
report is in circulation which purports to come from me 
and which says I have recently made $82,000 and paid 
all my debts has just reached me, and I have cabled 
back my regret to you that it is not true. I wrote a 
letter — a private letter — a short time ago, in which I ex- 
pressed the belief that I should be out of debt within the 

next twelvemonth. If you make as much as usual for 

649 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



me out of the book, that belief will crystallize into a fact, * 
and I shall be wholly out of debt. I am encoring you now. 

It is out of that moderate letter that the Eighty-Two- 
Thousand-Dollar mare's nest has developed. But why 
do you worry about the various reports? They do not 
worry me. They are not unfriendly, and I don't see how 
they can do any harm. Be patient; you have but a little 
while to wait; the possible reports are nearly all in. It 
has been reported that I was seriously ill — it was another 
man; dying — it was another man; dead — the other man 
again. It has been reported that I have received a legacy — 
it was another man; that I am out of debt — it was another 
man; and now comes this $82,000 — still another man. It 
has been reported that I am writing books — for publica- 
tion; I am not doing anything of the kind. It would sur- 
prise (and gratify) me if I should be able to get another 
book ready for the press within the next three years. You 
can see, yourself, that there isn't anything more to be 
reported — invention is exhausted. Therefore, don't worry. 
Bliss — the long night is breaking. As far as I can see, 
nothing remains to be reported, except that I have be- 
come a foreigner. When you hear it, don't you believe 
it. And don't take the trouble to deny it. Merely just 
raise the American flag on our house in Hartford, and let 
it talk. Truly yours, 

Mark Twain. 

P. S. This is not a private letter. I am getting tired of 
private letters. 

To Rev. J. H. Twkhell, in Hartford: 

Vienna- 
Hotel Metropolb, Nov. 19, '07. 

Dear Joe, — Above is our private (and permanent) 
address for the winter. You needn't send letters by 
London. 

I am very much obliged for Forrest's Austro-Hungarian 

articles. I have just finished reading the first one: and 

650 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



in it I find that his opinion and Vienna's are the same, 
upon a point which was puzzling me — the paucity (no, 
the absence) of Austrian Celebrities. He and Vienna 
both say the country cannot afford to allow great names 
to grow up; that the whole safety and prosperity of the 
Empire depends upon keeping things quiet; can't afford 
to have geniuses springing up and developing ideas and 
stirring the public soul. I am assured that every time a 
man finds himself blooming into fame, they just softly 
snake him down and relegate him to a wholesome ob- 
scurity. It is curious and interesting. 

Three days ago the New York World sent and asked 
a friend of mine (correspondent of a London daily) to get 
some Christmas greetings from the celebrities of the 
Empire. She spoke of this. Two or three bright Austrians 
were present. They said "There are none who are known 
all over the world! none who have achieved fame; none 
who can point to their work and say it is known far and 
wide in the earth: there are no names; Kossuth (known 
because he had a father) and Lecher, who made the 12 
hour speech; two names— nothing more. Every other 
country in the world, perhaps, has a giant or two whose 
heads are away up and can be seen, but ours. We've got 
the material — have always had it — but we have to suppress 
it; we can't afford to let it develop; our political salvation 
depends upon tranquillity — always has." 

Poor Livy ! She is laid up with rheumatism ; but she is 
getting along now. We have a good doctor, and he says 
she will be out of bed in a couple of days, but must stay 
in the house a week or ten. 

Clara is working faithfully at her music, Jean at her 
usual studies, and we all send love. 

Mark. 



Mention has already been made of the political excitement in 
Vienna. The trouble between the Hungarian and German 
legislative bodies presently became violent. Clemens found 
himself intensely interested, and was present in one of the gal- 

651 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

leries when it was cleared by the police. All sorts of stories 
were circulated as to what happened to him, one of which was 
cabled to America. A letter to Twichell sets forth what really 
happened. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Hotel Metropole, 
Vienna, Dec. io, % Q7. 

Dear Joe, — Pond sends me a Cleveland paper with a 
cablegram from here in it which says that when the 
police invaded the parliament and expelled the 1 1 members 
I waved my handkerchief and shouted Hoch die Deutschen ! 
and got hustled out. Oh dear, what a pity it is that one's 
adventures never happen ! When the Ordner (sergeant -at - 
arms) came up to our gallery and was hurrying the people 
out, a friend tried to get leave for me to stay, by saying. 
" But this gentleman is a foreigner — you don*t need to turn 
him out — he won't do any harm." 

"Oh, I know him very well — I recognize him by his 
pictures; and I should be very glad to let him stay, but 
I haven't any choice, because of the strictness of the 
orders." 

And so we all went out, and no one was hustled. Below, 
I ran across the London Times correspondent, and he 
showed me the way into the first gallery and I lost none 
of the show. The first gallery had not misbehaved, and 
was not disturbed. 

. . . We cannot persuade Livy to go out in society yet, 
but all the lovely people come to see her; and Clara and 
I go to dinner parties, and around here and there, and we 
all have a most hospitable good time. Jean's wood- 
carving flourishes, and her other studies. 

Good-bye Joe— and we all love all of you. 

Mark. 

Clemens made an article of the Austrian troubles, one of the 
best things he ever wrote, and certainly one of the clearest 

652 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



elucidations of the Austro-Hungarian confusions. It was pub- 
lished in Harper's Magazine, and is now included in his complete 
works. 

Thus far none of the Webster Company debts had been paid 
— at least, none of importance. The money had been accumu- 
lating in Mr. Rogers's hands, but Clemens was beginning to be 
depressed by the heavy burden. He wrote asking for relief. 

Part of a Utter to H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

Dear Mr. Rogers,— I throw up the sponge. I pull 
down the flag. Let us begin on the debts. I cannot bear 
the weight any longer. It totally unfits me for work. I 
have lost three entire months now. In that time I have 
begun twenty magazine articles and books — and flung 
every one of them aside in turn. The debts interfered 
every time, and took the spirit out of my work. And yet 
I have worked like a bond slave and wasted no time and 
spared no effort — . . . 

Rogers wrote, proposing a plan for beginning immediately 
upon the debts. Clemens replied enthusiastically, and during 
the next few weeks wrote every few days, expressing his delight 
in Liquidation. 

Extracts from letters to H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

. . . We all delighted with your plan. Only don't leave 
B — out. Apparently that claim has been inherited by 
some women— daughters, no doubt. We don't want to 
see them lose any thing. B— is an ass, and disgruntled, 
but I don't care for that. I am responsible for the money 
and must do the best I can to pay it. . . . I am writing 
hard — writing for the creditors, 

Dec. 2Q. 

Land we are glad to see those debts diminishing. For 
the first time in my life I am getting more pleasure out of 
paying money out than pulling it in. 

It— M 653 



* 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Jan. 2. 

Since we have begun to pay off the debts I have abun- 
dant peace of mind again — no sense of burden. Work is 
become a pleasure again— it is not labor any longer. 

March 7. 

Mrs. Clemens has been reading the credi tors' letters 
over and over again and thanks you deeply for sending 
them, and says it is the only really happy day she has had 
since Susy died. 



Digitized by Google 



XXXVTI 



LETTERS, 1898, TO HOWELLS AND TWICHELL. LIFE IN 
VIENNA. PAYMENT OF THE DEBTS. ASSASSINA- 
TION OF THE EMPRESS 

THE end of January saw the payment of the last of Mark 
Twain's debts. Once more he stood free before the 
world— a world that sounded his praises. The latter fact 
rather amused him. "Honest men must be pretty scarce," he 
said, "when they make so much fuss over even a defective 
specimen." When the end was in sight Clemens wrote the news 
to Howells in a letter as full of sadness as of triumph. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Hotel Metro pole, 
Vienna, Jan. 22, '08. 

Dear Howells —Look at those ghastly figures. I 
used to write it "Hartford, 1871." There was no Susy 
then — there is no Susy now. And how much lies between 
— one long lovely stretch of scented fields, and meadows, 
and shady woodlands, and suddenly Sahara! You speak 
of the glorious days of that old time — and they were. 
It is my quarrel — that traps like that are set. Susy and 
Winnie given us, in miserable sport, and then taken away. 

About the last time / saw you I described to you the 
culminating disaster in a book I was going to write (and 
will yet, when the stroke is further away) — a man's dead 
daughter brought to him when he had been through all 
other possible misfortunes— and I said it couldn't be 
done as it ought to be done except by a man who had 
lived it— it must be written with the blood out of a man's 

655 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



heart. I couldn't know, then, how soon I was to be made 
competent. I have thought of it many a time since. If 
you were here I think we could cry down each other's I 
necks, as in your dream. For we are a pair of old derelicts \ 
drifting around, now, with some of our passengers gone 
and the sunniness of the others in eclipse. 

I couldn't get along without work now. I bury myself 
in it up to the ears. Long hours — 8 and 9 on a stretch, 
sometimes. And all the days, Sundays included. It 
isn't all for print, by any means, for much of it fails to suit 
me; 50.000 words of it in the past year. It was because 
of the deadness which invaded me when Susy died. But 
I have made a change lately— into dramatic work — and I 
find it absorbingly entertaining. I don't know that I can 
write a play that will play: but no matter, I'll write 
half a dozen that won't, anyway. Dear me, I didn't 
know there was such fun in it. I'll write twenty that 
won't play. I get into immense spirits as soon as my day 
is fairly started. Of course a good deal of this friskiness 
comes of my being in sight of land — on the Webster & Co. 
debts, I mean. (Private.) We've lived close to the bone 
and saved every cent we could, and there's no undisputed 
claim, now, that we can't cash. I have marked this "pri- 
vate" because it is for the friends who are attending to the 
matter for us in New York to reveal it when they want to 
and if they want to. There are only two claims which I 
dispute and which I mean to look into personally before 
I pay them. But they are small. Both together they 
amount to only $12,500. I hope you will never get the 
like of the load saddled onto you that was saddled onto 
me 3 years ago. And yet there is such a solid pleasure in 
paying the things that I reckon maybe it is worth while 
to get into that kind of a hobble, after all. Mrs. Clemens 
gets millions of delight out of it; and the children have 
never uttered one complaint about the scrimping, from 
the beginning. 

We all send you and all of you our love. 

Mark. 

656 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Howells wrote: "I wish you could understand how unshaken 
you are, you old tower, in every way; your foundations are 
struck so deep that you will catch the sunshine of immortal 
years, and bask in the same light as Cervantes and Shakespeare." 

The Clemens apartments at the Metropole became a sort of 
social clearing-house of the Viennese art and literary life, much 
more like an embassy than the home of a mere literary man. 
Celebrities in every walk of life, persons of social and official 
rank, writers for the press, assembled there on terms hardly 
possible in any other home in Vienna. Wherever Mark Twain 
appeared in public he was a central figure. Now and then he 
read or spoke to aid some benefit, and these were great gather- 
ings attended by members of the royal family. It was following 
one such event that the next letter was written. 

(Private) 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Hotel Metropole, 
Vienna, Feb. j, *o8. 

Dear Joe, — There's that letter that I began so long 
ago — you see how it is: can't get time to finish anything. 
I pile up lots of work, nevertheless. There may be idle 
people in the world, but I'm not one of them. I say 
"Private" up there because I've got an adventure to 
tell, and you mustn't let a breath of it get out First I 
thought I would lay it up along with a thousand others 
that I've laid up for the same purpose — to talk to you 
about, but— those others have vanished out of my mem- 
ory; and that must not happen with this. 

The other night I lectured for a Vienna charity; and 
at the end of it Livy and I were introduced to a princess 
who is aunt to the heir apparent of the imperial throne — 
a beautiful lady, with a beautiful spirit, and very cordial 
in her praises of my books and thanks to me for writing 
them; and glad to meet me face to face and shake me by 
the hand — just the kind of princess that adorns a fairy 
tale and makes it the prettiest tale there is. 

Very well, we long ago found that when you are noticed 
by supremacies, the correct etiquette is to go, within a 

6 S 7 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



couple of days, and pay your respects in the quite simple 
form of writing your name in the Visitors' Book kept in 
the office of the establishment. That is the end of it, and 
everything is squared up and ship-shape. 

So at noon to-day Livy and I drove to the Archducal 
palace, and got by the sentries all right, and asked the 
grandly-uniformed porter for the book and said we wished 
to write our names in it. And he called a servant in livery 
and was sending us up stairs; and said her Royal Highness 
was out but would soon be in. Of course Livy said " No — 
no — we only want the book;" but he was firm, and said, 
"You are Americans?" 

"Yes." 

"Then you are expected, please go up stairs." 
" But indeed we are not expected — please let us have the 
book and — " 

"Her Royal Highness will be back in a very little while — 
she commanded me to tell you so — and you must wait." 

Well, the soldiers were there close by — there was no use 
trying to resist — so we followed the servant up; but when 
he tried to beguile us into a drawing-room, Livy drew the 
line; she wouldn't go in. And she wouldn't stay up there, 
either. She said the princess might come in at any moment 
and catch us, and it would be too infernally ridiculous for 
anything. So we went down stairs again — to my unspeak- 
able regret. For it was too darling a comedy to spoil. I 
was hoping and praying the princess would come, and 
catch us up there, and that those other Americans who 
were expected would arrive, and be taken for impostors 
by the portier, and shot by the sentinels — and then it 
would all go into the papers, and be cabled all over the 
world, and make an immense stir and be perfectly lovely. 
And by that time the princess would discover that we 
were not the right ones, and the Minister of War would 
be ordered out, and the garrison, and they would come 
for us, and there would be another prodigious time, and 
that would get cabled too, and — well, Joe, I was in a state 
of perfect bliss. But happily, oh, so happily, that big 

658 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



portier wouldn't let us out — he was sorry, but he must 
obey orders — we must go back up stairs and wait. Poor 
Livy — I couldn't help but enjoy her distress. She said 
we were in a fix, and how were we going to explain, if the 
princess should arrive before the rightful Americans came? 
We went up stairs again — laid off our wraps, and were 
conducted through one drawing room and into another, 
and left alone there and the door closed upon us. 

Livy was in a state of mind ! She said it was too theatri- 
cally ridiculous; and that I would never be able to keep 
my mouth shut; that I would be sure to let it out and it 
would get into the papers — and she tried to make me 
promise — "Promise what?" I said — "to be quiet about 
this? Indeed I won't — it's the best thing that ever hap- 
pened; I'll tell it, and add to it; and I wish Joe and 
Howells were here to make it perfect; I can't make all 
the rightful blunders myself — it takes all three of us to 
do justice to an opportunity like this. I would just like 
to see Howells get down to his work and explain, and lie, 
and work his futile and inventionless subterfuges when 
that princess comes raging in here and wanting to know.'* 
But Livy could not hear fun — it was not a time to be trying 
to be funny— we were in a most miserable and shameful 
situation, and if — 

Just then the door spread wide and our princess and 4 
more, and 3 little princes flowed in! Our princess, and 
her sister the Archduchess Marie Therese (mother to the 
imperial Heir and to the young girl Archduchesses present, 
and aunt to the 3 little princes) — and we shook hands all 
around and sat down and had a most sociable good time 
for half an hour — and by and by it turned out that we 
were the right ones, and had been sent for by a messenger 
who started too late to catch us at the hotel. We were 
invited for 2 o'clock, but we beat that arrangement by an 
hour and a half. 

Wasn't it a rattling good comedy situation? Seems a 
kind of pity we were the right ones. It would have been 
such nuts to see the right ones come, and get fired out, 

659 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

and we chatting along comfortably and nobody suspecting 
us for impostors. 

We send lots and lots of love. 

Mark. 

The reader who has followed these pages has seen how prone 
Mark Twain was to fall a victim to the lure of a patent-right 
— how he wasted several small fortunes on profitless contriv- 
ances, and one large one on that insatiable demon of intricacy 
and despair, the Paige type-setter. It seems incredible that, 
after that experience and its attending disaster, he should have 
been tempted again. But scarcely was the ink dry on the re- 
ceipts from his creditors when he was once more borne into the 
clouds on the prospect of millions, perhaps even billions, to be 
made from a marvelous carpet-pattern machine, the invention 
of Sczezepanik, an Austrian genius. That Clemens appreciated 
his own tendencies is shown by the parenthetic line with which 
he opens his letter on the subject to Mr. Rogers. Certainly 
no man was ever a more perfect prototype of Colonel Sellers 
than the creator of that lovely, irrepressible visionary. 

« 

To Mr. Rogers, in New York: 

» 

March 24, '98. 

Dear Mr. Rogers,— (I feel like Col. Sellers). 

Mr. Kleinberg [agent for Sczezepanik] came according 
to appointment, at 8.30 last night, and brought his Eng- 
lish-speaking Secretary. I asked questions about the 
auxiliary invention (which I call "No. 2") and got as 
good an idea of it as I could. It is a machine. It auto- 
matically punches the holes in the Jacquard cards, and 
does it with mathematical accuracy. It will do for $1 
what now costs $3. So it has value, but "No. 1 " is the 
great thing— (the designing invention.) It saves $9 out 
of $10 and the Jacquard looms must have it. 

Then I arrived at my new project, and said to him in 
substance, this: 

"You are on the point of selling the No. 1 patents to 
Belgium, Italy, etc. I suggest that you stop those negotia- 

660 



■ 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'.S LETTERS 



tions and put those people off two or three months. They 
are anxious now, they will not be less anxious then — just 
the reverse; people always want a thing that is denied 
them. 

44 So far as I know, no great world-patent has ever yet 
been placed in the grip of a single corporation. This is a 
good time to begin. 

44 We have to do a good deal of guess-work here, because 
we cannot get hold of just the statistics we want. Still, 
we have some good statistics — and I will use those for a 
test. 

44 You say that of the 1500 Austrian textile factories, 
800 use the Jacquard. Then we will guess that of the 4,000 
American factories 2,000 use the Jacquard and must have 
our No. 1. 

44 You say that a middle-sized Austrian factory employs 
from 20 to 30 designers and pays them from 800 to 3,000- 
odd florins a year — (a florin is 2 francs). Let us call the 
average wage 1500 florins ($600). 

" Let us apply these figures (the low wages too) to the 
2,000 American factories — with this difference, to guard 
against over-guessing; that instead of allowing for 20 to 
30 designers to a middle-sized factory, we allow only an 
average of 10 to each of the 2,000 factories— a total of 
20,000 designers. Wages at $600, a total of $12,000,000. 
Let us consider that No. 1 will reduce this expense to 
$2, 000,000 a year. The saving is $5,000,000 per each of 
the $200,000,000 of capital employed in the Jacquard 
bu f iness over there. 

44 Let us consider that in the countries covered by this 
patent, an aggregate of $1,500,000,000 of capital is em- 
ployed in factories requiring No. 1. 

44 The saving (as above) is $75,000,000 a year. The 
Company holding in its grip all these patents would 
collar $50,000,000 of that, as its share. Possibly more. 

44 Competition would be at an end in the Jacquard 
business, on this planet. Price-cutting would end. 
Fluctuations in values would cease. The business would 

661 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



be the safest and surest in the world; commercial panics 
could not seriously affect it; its stock would be as choice 
an investment as Government bonds. When the patents 
died the Company would be so powerful that it could still 
keep the whole business in its hands. Would you like to 
grant me the privilege of placing the whole Jacquard 
business of the world in the grip of a single Company 5 
And don't you think that the business would grow — grow 
like a weed?" 

"Ach, America — it is the country of the big! Let me 
get my breath— then we will talk." 

So then we talked— talked till pretty late. Would 
Germany and England join the combination? I said the 
Company would know how to persuade them. 

Then I asked for a Supplementary Option, to cover the 
world, and we parted. 

I am taking all precautions to keep my name out of 
print in connection with this matter. And we will now 
keep the invention itself out of print as well as we can. 
Descriptions of it have been granted to the " Dry Goods 
Economist" (New York) and to a syndicate of American 
papers. I have asked Mr. Kleinberg to suppress these, 
and he feels pretty sure he can do it. 

With love, 

S. L. C. 

If this splendid enthusiasm had not cooled by the time a 
reply came from Mr. Rogers, it must have received a sudden 
chill from the letter which he inclosed— the brief and concise 
report from a carpet-machine expert, who said: "I do not feel 
that it would be of any value to us in our mills, and the number 
of Jacquard looms in America is so limited that I am of the 
opinion that there is no field for a company to develop the in- 
vention here. A cursory examination of the pamphlet leads me 
to place no very high value upon the invention, from a practical 
standpoint." 

With the receipt of this letter carpet-pattern projects would 
seem to have suddenly ceased to be a factor in Mark Twain's 
calculations. Such a letter in the early days of the type-machine 

662 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



would have saved him a great sum in money and years of dis- 
appointment. But perhaps he would not have heeded it then. 

The year 1898 brought the Spanish-American War. Clemens 
was constitutionally against all wars, but writing to Twichell, 
whose son had enlisted, we gather that this one was an exception. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Harljord: 

Kaltenleutgeben, near Vienna, 

June 17, '08. 

Dear Joe, — You are living your war-days over again 
in Dave, and it must be a strong pleasure, mixed with a 
sauce of apprehension — enough to make it just schmeck, 
as the Germans say. Dave will come out with two or 
three stars on his shoulder-straps if the war holds, and 
then we shall all be glad it happened. 

We started with Bull Run, before. Dewey and Hobson 
have introduced an improvement on the game this time. 

I have never enjoyed a war — even in written history — 
as I am enjoying this one. For this is the worthiest one 
that was ever fought, so far as my knowledge goes. It 
is a worthy thing to fight for one's freedom; it is another 
sight finer to fight for another man's. And I think this 
is the first time it has been done. 

Oh, never mind Charley Warner, he would interrupt 
the raising of Lazarus. He would say, the will has been 
probated, the property distributed, it will be a world of 
trouble to settle the rows— better leave well enough alone; 
don't ever disturb anything, where it's going to break 
the soft smooth flow of things and wobble our tranquillity. 

Company! (Sh! it happens every day — and we came 
out here to be quiet.) 

Love to you all. 

Mark. 

They were spending the summer at Kaltenleutgeben, a pleas- 
ant village near Vienna, but apparently not entirely quiet. 
Many friends came out from Vienna, including a number of 
visiting Americans. Clemens, however, appears to have had 

663 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



considerable time for writing, as we gather from the next to 
Howells. 

To W. D. Howells, in America: 

Kaltenleutgbben, bei Wien, 

Aug. i6 % '98. 

Dear Howells,-— Your letter came yesterday. It then 
occurred to me that I might have known (per mental tele- 
graph) that it was due; for a couple of weeks ago when the 
Weekly came containing that handsome reference to me 
I was powerfully moved to write you; and my letter went 
on writing itself while I was at work at my other literature 
during the day. But next day my other literature was 
still urgent — and so on and so on; so my letter didn't 
get put into ink at all. But I see now, that you were 
writing, about that time, therefore a part of my stir 
could have come across the Atlantic per mental telegraph. 
In 1876 or '75 I wrote 40,000 words of a story called 
"Simon Wheeler M wherein the nub was the preventing 
of an execution through testimony furnished by mental 
telegraph from the other side of the globe. I had a lot of 
people scattered about the globe who carried in their 
pockets something like the old mesmerizer-button, made 
of different metals, and when they wanted to call up each 
other and have a talk, they "pressed the button" or did 
something, I don't remember what, and communication 
was at once opened. I didn't finish the story, though I 
re-began it in several new ways, and spent altogether 
70,000 words on it, then gave it up and threw it aside. 

This much as pieliminary to this remark: some day 
people will be able to call each other up from any part of 
the world and talk by mental telegraph — and not merely 
by impression, the impression will be articulated into 
words. It could be a terrible thing, but it won't be, because 
in the upper civilizations everything like sentimentality 
(I was going to say sentiment) will presently get ma- 
terialized out of people along with the already fading 
spiritualities; and so when a man is called who doesn't 

664 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



wish to talk he will be like those visitors you mention: 
"not chosen" — and will be frankly damned and shut off. 

Speaking of the ill luck of starting a piece of literary 
work wrong — and again and again; always aware that 
there is a way, if you could only think it out, which 
would make the thing slide effortless from the pen — the 
one right way, the sole form for you, the other forms being 
for men whose line those forms are, or who are capabler 
than yourself: I've had no end of experience in that (and 
maybe I am the only one — let us hope so.) Last summer 
I started 16 things wrong — 3 books and 13 mag. articles — 
and could only make 2 little wee things, 1 500 words alto- 
gether, succeed: — only that out of piles and stacks of 
diligently- wrought MS., the labor of 6 weeks' unremitting 
effort. I could make all of those things go if I would take 
the trouble to re-begin each one half a dozen times on a 
new plan. But none of them was important enough 
except one: the story I (in the wrong form) mapped out 
in Paris three or four years ago and told you about in 
New York under seal of confidence — no other person knows 
of it but Mrs. Clemens — the story to be called "Which was 
the Dream?" 

A week ago I examined the MS — 10,000 words — and 
saw that the plan was a totally impossible one — for me; 
but a new plan suggested itself, and straightway the tale 
began to slide from the pen with ease and confidence. I 
think I've struck the right one this time. I have already 
put 12,000 words of it on paper and Mrs. Clemenr is 
pretty outspokenly satisfied with it — a hard critic to 
content. I feel sure that all of the first half of the story — 
and I hope three-fourths — will be comedy; but by the 
former plan the whole of it (except the first 3 chapters) 
would have been tragedy and unendurable, almost. I 
think I can carry the reader a long way before he suspects 
that I am laying a tragedy-trap. In the present form I 
could spin 16 books out of it with comfort and joy; but 
I shall deny myself and restrict it to one. (If you should 
see a little short story in a magazine in the autumn called 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



"My Platonic Sweetheart" (written 3 weeks ago) thai 
is not this one. It may have been a suggester, though. 

I expect all these singular privacies to interest you, and 
you are not to let on that they don't. 

We are leaving, this afternoon, for Ischl, to use that as 
a base for the baggage, and then gad around ten days 
among the lakes and mountains to rest-up Mrs. Clemens, 
who is jaded with housekeeping. I hope I can get a chance 
to work a little in spots — I can't tell. But you do it — 
therefore why should you think I can't? 

[Remainder missing.] 

The dream story was never completed. It was the same that 
he had worked on in London, and perhaps again in Switzerland. 
It would be tried at other times and in other forms, but it never 
seemed to accommodate itself to a central idea, so that the good 
writing in it eventually went to waste. The short story men- 
tioned, "My Platonic Sweetheart," a charming, idyllic tale, 
was not published during Mark Twain's lifetime. Two years 
after his death it appeared in Harper's Magazine. 

The assassination of the Empress of Austria at Geneva was 
the startling event of that summer. In a letter to Twichell 
Clemens presents the tragedy in a few vivid paragraphs. Later 
he treated it at some length in a magazine article which, very 
likely because of personal relations with members of the Aus- 
trian court, he withheld from print. It has since been included 
in a volume of essays, What Is Man, etc. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Kaltenleutgeben, Sep. zj, *q8. 
Dear Joe, — You are mistaken; people don't send us 
the magazines. No — Harper, Century and McClure do; 
an example I should like to recommend to other pub- 
lishers. And so I thank you very much for sending me 
Brander's article. When you say "I like Brander Mat- 
thews; he impresses me as a man of parts and power," 
I back you, right up to the hub — I feel the same way — . 
And who. you u, h, has e^ed you, ^tud. far oufflu* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



me for my crimes against the Leather stockings and the 
Vicar, I ain't making any objection. Dem your gratitude! 

His article is as sound as a nut. Brander knows litera- 
ture, and loves it; he can talk about it and keep his 
temper; he can state his case so lucidly and so fairly and 
so forcibly that you have to agree with him, even when you 
don't agree with him; and he can discover and praise 
such merits as a book has, even when they are half a 
dozen diamonds scattered through an acre of mud. And 
so he has a right to be a critic. 

To detail just the opposite of the above invoice is to 
describe me. I haven't any right to criticise books, and 
I don't do it except when I hate them. I often want to 
criticise Jane Austen, but her books madden me so that 
I can't conceal my frenzy from the reader; and therefore 
I have to stop every time I begin. 

That good and unoffending lady the Empress is killed 
by a mad-man, and I am living in the midst of world- 
history again. The Queen's jubilee last year, the invasion 
of the Reichsrath by the police, and now this murder, 
which will still be talked of and described and painted a 
thousand years from now. To have a personal friend of 
the wearer of the crown burst in at the gate in the deep 
dusk of the evening and say in a voice broken with tears, 
"My God the Empress is murdered," and fly toward her 
home before we can utter a question — why, it brings the 
giant event home to you, makes you a part of it and per- 
sonally interested: it is as if your neighbor Antony should 
come flying and say "Caesar is butchered — the head of 
the world is fallen!" 

Of course there is no talk but of this. The mourning 
is universal and genuine, the consternation is stupefying. 
The Austrian Empire is being draped with black. Vienna 
will be a spectacle to see, by next Saturday, when the 
funeral cortege marches. We are invited to occupy a 
room in the sumptuous new hotel (the "Krantz" where 
we are to live during the Fall and Winter) and view it, 
and we shall go. 

667 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Speaking of Mrs. Leiter, there is a noble dame in Vienna, 
about whom they retail similar slanders. She said in 
French — she is weak in French — that she had been spend- 
ing a Sunday afternoon in a gathering of the "demi- 
monde." Meaning the unknown land, that mercantile 
land, that mysterious half-world which underlies the 
aristocracy. But these Malaproperies are always in- 
ventions — they don't happen. 

Yes, I wish we could have some talks; I'm full to the 
eye-lids. Had a noble good one with Parker and Dunham 
— land, but we were grateful for that visit! 

Yours with all our loves. 

Mark. 

[Inclosed with the foregoing.] 

Among the inadequate attempts to account for the 
assassination we must concede high rank to the German 
Emperor's. He justly describes it as a "deed unparalleled 
for ruthlessness," and then adds that it was "ordained 
from above." 

I think this verdict will not be popular "above." A 
man is either a free agent or he isn't. If a man is a free 
agent, this prisoner is responsible for what he has done; 
but if a man is not a free agent, if the deed was ordained 
from above, there is no rational way of making this pris- 
oner even partially responsible for it, and the German 
court cannot condemn him without manifestly com- 
mitting a crime. Logic is logic; and by disregarding its 
laws even Emperors as capable and acute as William II 
can be beguiled into making charges which should not be 
ventured upon except in the shelter of plenty of lightning- 
rods. 

Mark. 

The end of the year 1898 found Mark Twain once more in 
easy, even luxurious, circumstances. The hard work and good 
fortune which had enabled him to pay his debts had, in the course 
of another year, provided what was comparative affluence. His 
report to Howells is characteristic and interesting. 

668 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Hotel Krantz, Wien, L. Neuer Markt 6 

Dec. 30, *o8. 

Dear Howells— I begin with a date— including all 
the details — though I shall be interrupted presently by 
a South-African acquaintance who is passing through, 
and it may be many days before I catch another leisure 
moment. Note how suddenly a thing can become habit, 
and how indestructible the habit is, afterward! In your 
house in Cambridge a hundred years ago, Mrs. Howells 
said to me, 4 4 Here is a bunch of your letters, and the 
dates are of no value, because you don't put any in— 
the years, anyway." That remark diseased me with a 
habit which has cost me worlds of time and torture and 
ink, and millions of vain efforts and buckets of tears to 
break it, and here it is yet — I could easier get rid of a 
virtue. . . . 

I hope it will interest you (for I have no one else who 
would much care to know it) that here lately the dread of 
leaving the children in difficult circumstances has died down 
and disappeared and I am now having peace from that 
long, long nightmare, and can sleep as well as anyone. 
Every little while, for these three years, now, Mrs. Clemens 
has come with pencil and paper and figured up the condi- 
tion of things (she keeps the accounts and the bank-book) 
and has proven to me that the clouds were lifting, and so 
has hoisted my spirits temporarily and kept me going 
till another figuring-up was necessary. Last night she 
figured up for her own satisfaction, not mine, and found 
that we own a house and furniture in Hartford; that 
my English and American copyrights pay an income 
which represents a value of $200,000; and that we 
have $107,000 cash in the bank. I have been out and 
bought a box of 6-cent cigars; I was smoking \ l A cent- 
ers before. 

At the house of an English friend, on Christmas Eve, 
we saw the Mouse-Trap played and well played. I thought 

11—15 669 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the house would kill itself with laughter. By George they 
played with life! and it was most devastatingly funny. 
And it was well they did, for they put us Clemenses in 
the front seat, and if they played it poorly I would have 
assaulted them. The head young man and girl were 
Americans, the other parts were taken by English, Irish 
and Scotch girls. Then there was a nigger-minstrel show, 
of the genuine old sort, and I enjoyed that, too, for the 
nigger-show was always a passion of mine. This one was 
created and managed by a Quaker doctor from Philada., 
(23 years old) and he was the middle man. There were 9 
others — 5 Americans from 5 States and a Scotchman, 2 
Englishmen and an Irishman — all post-graduate-medical 
young fellows, of course — or, it could be music; but it 
would be bound to be one or the other. 

It's quite true — I don't read you "as much as I ought," 
nor anywhere near half as much as I want to; still I read 
you all I get a chance to. I saved up your last story to 
read when the numbers should be complete, but before 
that time arrived some other admirer of yours carried 
off the papers. I will watch admirers of yours when the 
Silver Wedding Journey begins, and that will not happen 
again. The last chance at a bound book of yours was in 
London nearly two years ago — the last volume of your 
short things, by the Harpers. I read the whole book 
twice through and some of the chapters several times, 
and the reason that that was as far as I got with it was 
that I lent it to another admirer of yours and he is admir- 
ing it yet. Your admirers have ways of their own; I 
don't know where they get them. 

Yes, our project is to go home next autumn if we find 
we can afford to live in New York. We've asked a friend 
to inquire about flats and expenses. But perhaps nothing 
will come of it. We do afford to live in the finest hotel in 
Vienna, and have 4 bedrooms, a dining-room, a drawing- 
room, 3 bath-rooms and 3 Vorzimmers, (and food) but 
we couldn't get the half of it in New York for the same 
money ($600 a month). 

670 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Susy hovers about us this holiday week, and the shadows 
fall all about us of 

" The days when we went gipsying 
A long time ago." 

Death is so kind, so benignant, to whom he loves; but 
he goes by us others and will not look our way. We saw 
the "Master of Palmyra" last night. How Death, with 
the gentleness and majesty, made the human grand-folk 
around him seem little and trivial and silly! 

With love from all of us to all of you. 



Mark. 




XXXVIII 

LETTERS, 1899, TO HOWELLS AND OTHERS. VIENNA. LON- 
DON. A SUMMER IN SWEDEN 

THE beginning of 1899 found the Clemens family still in 
Vienna, occupying handsome apartments at the Hotel 
Krantz. Their rooms, so often thronged with gay and distin- 
guished people, were sometimes called the "Second Embassy." 
Clemens himself was the central figure of these assemblies. Of 
all the foreign visitors in the Austrian capital he was the most 
notable. Everywhere he was surrounded by a crowd of listen- 
ers — his sayings and opinions were widely quoted. 

A project for world disarmament promulgated by the Crar 
of Russia would naturally interest Mark Twain, and when 
William T. Stead, of the Renew of Reviews, cabled him fee an 
opinion on the matter, he sent at first a brief word and on the 
same day followed it with more extended comment. The great 
war which has since devastated the world gives to this incident 
an added interest. 

To Wtn. T. Stead, in London: 

No. 1. 

Vienna, Jan. p. 
Dear Mr. Stead, — The Czar is ready to disarm: / 
am ready to disarm. Collect the others, it should not be 
much of a task now. Mark Twain. 

To Wtn. T. Stead, in London: 

No. 2. 

Dear Mr. Stead, — Peace by compulsion. That seems 
a better idea than the other. Peace by persuasion has a 
pleasant sound, but I think we should not be able to work 
it. We should have to tame the human race first, and 

672 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



history seems to show that that cannot be done. Can't 
we reduce the armaments little by little — on a pro rata 
basis — by concert of the powers? Can't we get four great 
powers to agree to reduce their strength 10 per cent a year 
and thrash the others into doing likewise? For, of course, 
we cannot expect all of the powers to be in their right 
minds at one time. It has been tried. We are not going 
to try to get all of them to go into the scheme peaceably, 
are we? In that case I must withdraw my influence; 
because, for business reasons, I must preserve the out- 
ward signs of sanity. Four is enough if they can be 
securely harnessed together. They can compel peace, and 
peace without compulsion would be against nature and not 
operative. A sliding scale of reduction of 10 per cent 
a year has a sort of plausible look, and I am willing to 
try that if three other powers will join. I feel sure that 
the armaments are now many times greater than necessary 
for the requirements of either peace or war. Take war- 
time for instance. Suppose circumstances made it neces- 
sary for us to fight another Waterloo, and that it would do 
what it did before — settle a large question and bring 
peace. I will guess that 400,000 men were on hand 
at Waterloo (I have forgotten the figures). In five 
hours they disabled 50,000 men. It took them that 
tedious, long time because the firearms delivered only 
two or three shots a minute. But we would do the work 
now as it was done at Omdurman, with shower guns, rain- 
ing 600 balls a minute. Four men to a gun — is that the 
number? A hundred and fifty shots a minute per man. 
Thus a modern soldier is 149 Waterloo soldiers in one. 
Thus, also, we can now retain one man out of each 150 in 
service, disband the others, and fight our Waterloos just 
as effectively as we did eighty-five years ago. We should 
do the same beneficent job with 2,800 men now that we 
did with 400,000 then. The allies could take 1,400 of 
the men, and give Napoleon 1400 and then whip him. 

But instead what do we see? In war-time in Germany, 
Russia and France, taken together we find about 8 million 

673 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



men equipped for the field. Each man represents 149 
Waterloo men, in usefulness and killing capacity. Alto- 
gether they constitute about 350 million Waterloo men, 
and there are not quite that many grown males of the 
human race now on this planet. Thus we have this insane 
fact — that whereas those three countries could arm 18,000 
men with modern weapons and make them the equals of 
3 million men of Napoleon's day, and accomplish with 
them all necessary war work, they waste their money and 
their prosperity creating forces of their populations in 
piling together 349,982,000 extra Waterloo equivalents 
which they would have no sort of use for if they would 
only stop drinking and sit down and cipher a little. 

Perpetual peace we cannot have on any terms, I sup- 
pose; but I hope we can gradually reduce the war strength 
of Europe till we get it down to where it ought to be — 
20,000 men, properly armed. Then we can have all the 
peace that is worth while, and when we want a war any- 
body can afford it. 

Vienna, January g. 
P. S. — In the article I sent the figures are wrong — 
"350 xrrillion" ought to be 450 million; 11 349,982,000" 
ought to be 449,982,000, and the remark about the sum 
being a little more than the present number of males on 
the planet — that is wrong, of course; it represents really 
one and a half the existing males. 

Now and then one of Mark Twain's old comrades still reached 
out to him across the years. He always welcomed such letters 
— they came as from a lost land of romance, recalled always with 
tenderness. He sent light, chaffing replies, but they were never 
without an undercurrent of affection. 

To Major "Jack" Downing, in Middle port, Ohio: 

Hotel Krantz, Wkin, I, Neuer Marrt 6, 

Feb. 26, 1809. 

Dear Major, — No; it was to Bixby that I was appren- 
ticed. He was to teach me the river for a certain specified 

674 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



sum. I have forgotten what it was, but I paid it. I steered 
a trip for Bart Bowen, of Keokuk, on the A. T. Lacy, and 
I was partner with Will Bowen on the A. B. Chambers 
(one trip), and with Sam Bowen a whole summer on a 
small Memphis packet. 

The newspaper report you sent me is incorrect. Bixby 
is not 67: he is 97. I am 63 myself, and I couldn't talk 
plain and had just begun to walk when I apprenticed 
myself to Bixby who was then passing himself off for 57 — 
and successfully too, for he always looked 60 or 70 years 
younger than he really was. At that time he was piloting 
the Mississippi on a Potomac commission granted him by 
George Washington who was a personal friend of his before 
the Revolution. He has piloted every important river in 
America on that commission, he has also used it as a pass- 
port in Russia. I have never revealed these facts before. 
I notice, too, that you are deceiving the people concerning 
your age. The printed portrait which you have enclosed 
is not a portrait of you, but a portrait of me when I was 
19. I remember very well when it was common for people 
to mistake Bixby for your grandson. Is it spreading, I 
wonder — this disposition of pilots to renew their youth 
by doubtful methods? Beck Jolly and Joe Bryan — they 
probably go to Sunday school now — but it will not deceive. 

Yes, it is as you say. All of the procession but a fraction 
has passed. It is time for us all to fall in. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Hotel Krantz 
Wien 1. Neubi Markt 6 

A pril 2, 'oo. 

Dear Howells, — I am waiting for the April Harper, 
which is about due now; waiting, and strongly interested. 
You are old enough to be a weary man, with paling inter- 
ests, but you do not show it. You do your work in the 
same old delicate and delicious and forceful and searching 

675 



Digitized byTjOOQie 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and perfect way. I don't know how you can — but I sus- 
pect. I suspect that to you there is still dignity in human 
life, and that Man is not a joke — a poor joke — the poorest 
that was ever contrived. Since I wrote my Bible, (last 
year) 1 — which Mrs. Clemens loathes, and shudders over, 
and will not listen to the last half nor allow me to print 
any part of it, Man is not to me the respect-worthy person 
he was before; and so I have lost my pride in him, and 
can't write gaily nor praisefully about him any more. 
And I don't intend to try. I mean to go on writing, for 
that is my best amusement, but I shan't print much, (for 
I don't wish to be scalped, any more than another.) 

April 5. The Harper has come. I have been in Leipzig 
with your party, and then went on to Karlsbad and saw 
Mrs. Marsh's encounter with the swine with the tooth- 
pick and the other manners. 2 — At this point Jean carried 
the magazine away. 

Is it imagination, or — Anyway I seem to get furtive 
and fleeting glimpses which I take to be the weariness 
and condolence of age; indifference to sights and things 
once brisk with interest; tasteless stale stuff which used 
to be champagne; the boredom of travel: the secret sigh 
behind the public smile, the private What-in-hell-did-I- 
come-for! 

But maybe that is your art. Maybe that is what you 
intend the reader to detect and think he has made a 
Columbus-discovery. Then it is well done, perfectly 
done. I wrote my last travel book 3 — in hell ; but I let on, 
the best I could, that it was an excursion through heaven. 
Some day I will read it, and if its lying cheerfulness fools 
me, then I shall believe it fooled the reader. How I did 
loathe that journey around the world ! — except the sea-part 
and India. 

Evening. My tail hangs low. I thought I was a financier 
— and I bragged to you. I am not bragging, now. The 

• What Is Man. 

• In "Their Silver Wedding Journey." 
1 Following the Equator. 

676 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



stock which I sold at such a fine profit early in January, has 
never ceased to advance, and is now worth $60,000 more 
than I sold it for. I feel just as if I had been spending 
$20,000 a month, and I feel reproached for this showy and 
unbecoming extravagance. 

Last week I was going down with the family to Budapest 
to lecture, and to make a speech at a banquet. Just as I 
was leaving here I got a telegram from London asking for 
the speech for a New York paper. I (this is strictly private) 
sent it. And then / didn't make that speech, but another of 
a quite different character — a speech born of something 
which the introducer said. If that said speech got cabled 
and printed, you needn't let on that it was never uttered. 

That was a darling night, and those Hungarians were 
lovely people. We were there a week and had a great time. 
At the banquet I heard their chief orator make a most 
graceful and easy and beautiful and delicious speech — I 
never heard one that enchanted me more — although I did 
not understand a word of it, since it was in Hungarian. 
But the art of it! — it was superlative. 

They are wonderful English scholars, these people; my 
lecture audience — all Hungarians — understood me per- 
fectly — to judge by the effects. The English clergyman 
told me that in his congregation are 150 young English 
women who earn their living teaching their language; and 
that there are others besides these. 

For 60 cents a week the telephone reads the morning 
news to you at home; gives you the stocks and markets 
at noon; gives you lessons in 3 foreign languages during 
3 hours; gives you the afternoon telegrams; and at night 
the concerts and operas. Of course even the clerks and 
seamstresses and bootblacks and everybody else are 
subscribers. 

(Correction. Mrs. Clemens says it is 60 cents a month.) 

I am renewing my youth. I made 4 speeches at one 
banquet here last Saturday night. And I've been to a 
lot of football matches. 

Jean has been in here examining the poll for the Im- 

677 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



mortals ("Literature," March 24,) in the hope, I think, 
that at last she should find me at the top and you in 
second place; and if that is her ambition she has suffered 
disappointment for the third time — and will never fare 
any better, I hope, for you are where you belong, by every 
right. She wanted to know who it is that does the voting, 
but I was not able to tell her. Nor when the election will 
be completed and decided. 

Next Morning. I have been reading the morning paper. 
I do it every morning — well knowing that I shall find in 
it the usual depravities and basenesses and hypocrisies 
and cruelties that make up civilization, and cause me to 
put in the rest of the day pleading for the damnation of 
the human race. I cannot seem to get my prayers an- 
swered, yet I do not despair. 

{Escaped from) 5 o'clock tea. ('sh !) Oh, the American 
girl in Europe! Often she is creditable, but sometimes 
she is just shocking. This one, a minute ago — 19, fat- 
face, raspy voice, pert ways, the self-complacency of God; 
and with it all a silly laugh (embarrassed) which kept 
breaking out through her chatter all along, whereas there 
was no call for it, for she said nothing that was funny. 
"Spose so many Ve told y* how they 'n joyed y'r chapt'r 
on the Germ' tongue it's bringin* coals to Newcastle Ke- 
he! say anything 'bout it Ke-hehe! Spent m' vacation *n 
Russia, *n saw Tolstoi; he said — M It made me shudder. 

April 12. Jean has been in here with a copy of Litera- 
ture, complaining that I am again behind you in the elec- 
tion of the 10 consecrated members; and seems troubled 
about it and not quite able to understand it. But I have 
explained to her that you are right there on the ground, 
inside the pool-booth, keeping game — and that that 
makes a large difference in these things. 

13th. I have been to the Knustausstellung with Mrs. 
Clemens. The office of art seems to be to grovel in the 
dirt before Emperors and this and that and the other 
damned breed of priests. 

Yrs ever Mark. 
678 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Howells and Clemens were corresponding regularly again, 
though not with the frequency of former years. Perhaps neither 
of them was bubbling over with things to say; perhaps it was 
becoming yearly less attractive to pick up a pen and write, and 
then, of course, there was always the discouragement of distance. 
Once Howells wrote: "I know this will find you in Austria be- 
fore I can well turn round, but I must make believe you are in 
Kennebunkport before I can begin it." And in another letter: 
"It ought to be as pleasant to sit down and write to you as to 
sit down and talk to you, but it isn't. . . . The only reason why 
I write is that I want another letter from you, and because I 
have a whole afternoon for the job. I have the whole of every 
afternoon, for I cannot work later than lunch. I am fagged by 
that time, and Sunday is the only day that brings unbearable 
leisure. I hope you will be in New York another winter; then 
I shall know what to do with these foretastes of eternity." 

Clemens usually wrote at considerable length, for he had a 
good deal to report of his life in the Austrian capital, now draw- 
ing to a close. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

May i2 % 1899. 

Dear Howells, — 7.15 p. m. Tea (for Mr. and Mrs. 
Tower, who are leaving for Russia) just over; nice people 
and rather creditable to the human race: Mr. and Mrs. 
Tower; the new Minister and his wife; the Secretary of 
Legation; the Naval (and Military) Attache* ; several 
English ladies; an Irish lady; a Scotch lady; a particularly 
nice young Austrian baron who wasn't invited but came 
and went supposing it was the usual thing and wondered 
at the unusually large gathering; two other Austrians and 
several Americans who were also in his fix ; the old Baronin 
Langeman, the only Austrian invited;— the rest were 
Americans. It made just a comfortable crowd in our 
parlor, with an overflow into Clara's through the folding 
doors. I don't enjoy teas, and am daily spared them by 
Mrs. Clemens, but this was a pleasant one. I had only 
one accident. The old Baronin Langeman is a person I 
have a strong fondness for, for we violently disagree on 

679 



Digitized b^iGbgle 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



some subjects and as violently agree on others: for 
instance, she is temperance and I am not: she has religious 
beliefs and feelings and I have none; (she's a Methodisi^ 
she is a democrat and so am I; she is woman's rights and 
so am I; she is laborers' rights and approves trades unions 
and strikes, and that is me. And so on. After she was 
gone an English lady whom I greatly like, began to talk 
sharply against her for contributing money, time, labor, 
and public expression of favor to a strike that is on (for 
an n-hour day) in the silk factories of Bohemia — and she 
caught me unprepared and betrayed me into over-warm 
argument. I am sorry: for she didn't know anything 
about the subject, and I did; and one should be gentle 
with the ignorant, for they are the chosen of God. 

(The new Minister is a good man, but out of place. 
The Sec. of Legation is a good man, but out of place. The 
Attache* is a good man. but out of place. Our government 
for displacement beats the new White Star ship; and her 
possible is 17,200 tons.) 

May 1 j, 4 p.m. A beautiful English girl and her hand- 
some English husband came up and spent the evening, 
and she certainly is a bird. English parents — she was 
born and reared in Roumania and couldn't talk English 
till she was 8 or 10. She came up clothed like the sunset, 
and was a delight to look at. (Roumanian costume.) . . . 

Twenty-four young people have gone out to the Sem- 
mering to-day (and to-morrow) and Mrs. Clemens and 
an English lady and old Leschetitzky and his wife have 
gone to chaperon them. They gave me a chance to go, 
but there are no snow mountains that I want to look at. 
Three hours out, three hours back, and sit up all night 
watching the young people dance ; yelling conversationally 
and being yelled at, conversationally, by new acquaint- 
ances, through the deafening music, about how I like 
Vienna, and if it's my first visit, and how long we expect 
to stay, and did I see the foot-washing, and am I writing 
a book about Vienna, and so on. The terms seemed too 
severe. Snow mountains are too dear at the price. . . . 

680 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



For several years I have been intending to stop writing 
for print as soon as I could afford it. At last I can afford; 
it, and have put the pot-boiler pen away. What I have! 
been wanting is a chance to write a book without reserves 
— a book which should take account of no one's feelings, 
and no one's prejudices, opinions, beliefs, hopes, illusions, 
delusions; a book which should say my say, right out of 
my heart, in the plainest language and without a limita- 
tion of any sort. I judged that that would be an unim- 
aginable luxury, heaven on earth. 

It is under way, now, and it is a luxury! an intellectual 
drunk. Twice I didn't start it right; and got pretty far 
in, both times, before I found it out. But I am sure it is 
started right this time. It is in tale-form. I believe I can 
make it tell what I think of Man, and how he is con- 
structed, and what a shabby poor ridiculous thing he is, 
and how mistaken he is in his estimate of his character 
and powers and qualities and his place among the animals. 

So far, I think I am succeeding. I let the madam into 
the secret day before yesterday, and locked the doors and 
read to her the opening chapters. She said— 

14 It is perfectly horrible— and perfectly beautiful !" 

"Within the due limits of modesty, that is what / 
think." 

I hope it will take me a year or two to write it, and that 
it will turn out to be the right vessel to contain all the 
abuse I am planning to dump into it. 

Yours ever Mark. 

The story mentioned in the foregoing, in which Mark Twain 
was to give his opinion of man, was The Mysterious Stranger. 
It was not finished at the time, and its closing chapter was not 
found until after his death. Six years later (1016) it was pub- 
lished serially in Harper's Magazine, and in book form. 

The end of May found the Clemens party in London, where 
they were received and entertained with all the hospitality they 
had known in earlier years. Clemens was too busy for letter- 
writing, but in the midst of things he took time to report 
to Howells an amusing incident of one of their entertainments. 

681 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To W. D. Howells, in America: 

London, July j, 'op. 

Dear Howells, — . . . I've a lot of things to write you, 
but it's no use — I can't get time for anything these days. 
I must break off and write a postscript to Canon Wilber- 
force before I go to bed . This afternoon he left a luncheon- 
party half an hour ahead of the rest, and carried off my 
hat (which has Mark Twain in a big hand written in it.) 
When the rest of us came out there was but one hat that 
would go on my head— it fitted exactly, too. So wore it 
away. It had no name in it, but the Canon was the only 
man who was absent. I wrote him a note at 8 p. m.; 
saying that for four hours I had not been able to take 
anything that did not belong to me, nor stretch a fact 
beyond the frontiers of truth, and my family were getting 
alarmed. Could he explain my trouble? And now at 8.30 
p. m. comes a note from him to say that all the afternoon 
he has been exhibiting a wonder-compelling mental 
vivacity and grace of expression, etc., etc., and have I 
missed a hat? Our letters have crossed. 

Yours ever Mark. 

News came of the death of Robert Ingersoll. Clemens had 
been always one of his most ardent admirers, and a warm per- 
sonal friend. To Ingersoll's niece he sent a word of heartfelt 
sympathy. 

To Miss Eva FarreU, in New York: 

30 Wellington Court, 
Albert Gate. 

Dear Miss Farrbll,— Except my daughter's, I have 
not grieved for any death as I have grieved for his. His 
was a great and beautiful spirit, he was a man — all man 
from his crown to his foot soles. My reverence for him 
was deep and genuine; I prized his affection for me and 
returned it with usury. 

Sincerely Yours, S. L. Clemens, 
68a 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Clemens and family decided to spend the summer in Sweden, 
at Sanna, in order to avail themselves of osteopathic treatment 
as practised by Heinrick Kellgren. Kellgren 's method, known 
as the "Swedish movements," seemed to Mark Twain a wonder- 
ful cure for all ailments, and he heralded the discovery far and 
wide. He wrote to friends far and near advising them to try 
Kellgren for anything they might happen to have. Whatever 
its beginning, any letter was likely to close with some mention 
of the new panacea. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, traveling in Europe: 

Sanna, Sept. 6, 'pp. 

Dear Job,— I've no business in here — I ought to be 
outside. I shall never see another sunset to begin with it 
this side of heaven. Venice? land, what a poor interest 
that is! This is the place to be. I have seen about 60 
sunsets here; and a good 40 of them were clear and away 
beyond anything I had ever imagined before for dainty and 
exquisite and marvellous beauty and infinite change and 
variety. America? Italy? The tropics? They have no 
notion of what a sunset ought to be. And this one— this 
unspeakable wonder! It discounts all the rest. It brings 
the tears, it is so unutterably beautiful. 

If I had time, I would say a word about this curative 
system here. The people actually do several of the great 
things the Christian Scientists pretend to do. You wish 
to advise with a physician about it? Certainly. There 
is no objection. He knows next to something about his 
own trade, but that will not embarrass him in framing a 
verdict about this one. I respect your superstitions — we 
all have them. It would be quite natural for the cautious 
Chinaman to ask his native priest to instruct him as to 
the value of the new religious specialty which the Western 
missionary is trying to put on the market, before investing 
in it. (He would get a verdict.) 

Love to you all! 

Always Yours 

Mark. 

683 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Howells wrote that he was going on a reading-tour — dreading 
it, of course — and asking for any advice that Clemens fek 
qualified to give. Naturally, Clemens gave him the latest he 
had in stock, without realizing, perhaps, that he was recom- 
mending an individual practice which few would be likely to 
imitate. Nevertheless, what he says is interesting. 

To W. D. Howells, in America: 

S ann a , Sweden, Sept. 26 % '00. 

Dear Howells, — Get your lecture by heart — it will 
pay you. I learned a trick in Vienna — by accident— 
which I wish I had learned years ago. I meant to read 
from a Tauchnitz, because I knew I hadn't well memorized 
the pieces; and I came on with the book and read a few 
sentences, then remembered that the sketch needed a 
few words of explanatory introduction; and so, lowering 
the book and now and then unconsciously using it to gesture 
with, I talked the introduction, and it happened to carry 
me into the sketch itself, and then I went on, pretending 
that I was merely talking extraneous matter and would 
come to the sketch presently. It was a beautiful success. 
I knew the substance of the sketch and the telling phrases 
of it; and so, the throwing of the rest of it into informal 
talk as I went along limbered it up and gave it the snap 
and go and freshness of an impromptu. I was to read" 
several pieces, and I played the same game with all of 
them, and always the audience thought I was being re- 
minded of outside things and throwing them in, and was 
going to hold up the book and begin on the sketch pres- 
ently—and so I always got through the sketch before they 
were entirely sure that it had begun. I did the same thing 
in Budapest and had the same good time over again. It's 
a new dodge, and the best one that was ever invented. 
Try it. You'll never lose your audience — not even for a 
moment. Their attention is fixed, and never wavers. 
And that is not the case where one reads from book or 
MS., or where he stands up without a note and frankly 
exposes the fact, by his confident manner and smooth 

684 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



phrasing, that he is not improvising, but reciting from 
memory. And in the heat of telling a thing that is memo- 
rised in substance only, one flashes out the happiest sud- 
denly-begotten phrases every now and then! Try it. 
Such a phrase has a life and sparkle about it that twice 
as good a one could not exhibit if prepared beforehand, 
and it "fetches" an audience in such an enthusing and 
inspiring and uplifting way that that lucky phrase breeds 
another one, sure. 

Your September instalment 1 was delicious — every word 
of it. You haven't lost any of your splendid art. Callers 
have arrived. With love Mark. 

"Yes," wrote Howells, "if I were a great histrionic artist like 
you I would get my poor essays by heart, and recite them, but 
being what I am I should do the thing so lifelessly that I had 
better recoenixe their deadness franklv and read them." 

From Vienna Clemens had contributed to the Cosmopolitan, 
then owned by John Brisben Walker, his first article on Christian 
Science. It was a delicious bit of humor and found such en- 
thusiastic appreciation that Walker was moved to send an ad- 
ditional $200 check in payment for it. This brought prompt 
acknowledgment. 

To John Brisben Walker, in Irvington, N. Y.: 

London, Oct. iq % 'go. 
Dear Mr. Walker, — By gracious but you have a 
talent for making a man feel proud and good! To say a 
compliment well is a high art and few possess it. You 
know how to do it, and when you confirm its sincerity 
with a handsome cheque the limit is reached and com- 
pliment can no higher go. I like to work for you: when 
you don't approve an article you say so, recognizing that 
I am not a child and can stand it; and when you approve 
an article I don't have to dicker with you as if I raised 
peanuts and you kept a stand; I know I shall get every 
penny the article is worth. 

1 "Their Silver Wedding Journey." 
II.— W 685 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



You have given me very great pleasure, and I thank 
you for it. Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

On the same day he sent word to Howells of the good luck 
which now seemed to be coming his way. The Joan of Arc in- 
troduction was the same that to-day appears in his collected 
works under the title of Saint Joan of Arc. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

London, Oct. ig, *og. 

Dear Howells, — My, it's a lucky day ! — of the sort when 
it never rains but it pours. I was to write an introduction 
to a nobler book — the English translation of the Official 
Record {unabridged) of the Trials and Rehabilitation of 
Joan of Arc, and make a lot of footnotes. I wrote the 
introduction in Sweden, and here a few days ago I tore 
loose from a tale I am writing, and took the MS book and 
went at the grind of note-making — a fearful job for a man 
not used to it. This morning brought a note from my 
excellent friend Murray, a rich Englishman who edits the 
translation, saying, "Never mind the notes — we'll make 
the translators do them." That was comfort and joy. 

The same mail brought a note from Canon Wilberforce, 
asking me to talk Joan of Arc in his drawing-room to the 
Dukes and Earls and M. P.'s— (which would fetch me 
out of my seclusion and into print, and I couldn't have 
that,) and so of course I must run down to the Abbey and 
explain — and lose an hour. Just then came Murray and 
said "Leave that to me — I'U go and do the explaining 
and put the thing off 3 months; you write a note and tell 
him I am coming." 

(Which I did, later. Wilberforce carried off my hat 
from a lunch party last summer, and in to-day's note he 
said he wouldn't steal my new hat this time. In my note 
I said I couldn't make the drawing-room talk, now — 
Murray would explain ; and added a P. S. : "You mustn't 
think it is because I am afraid to trust my hat in vour 

686 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



reach again, for I assure you upon honor it isn't. I should 
bring my old one.") 

I had suggested to Murray a fortnight ago, that he get 
some big guns to write introductory monographs for the 
book. 

Miss X, Joan's Voices and Prophecies. 
The Lord Chief Justice of England, the legal prodigies 
which she performed before her judges. 
Lord Roberts, her military genius. 
Kipling, her patriotism. 

And so on. When he came this morning he said he 
had captured Miss X; that Lord Roberts and Kipling 
were going to take hold and see if they could do mono- 
graphs worthy of the book. He hadn't run the others to 
cover yet. but was on their track. Very good news. It 
is a grand book, and is entitled to the best efforts of the 
best people. As for me, I took pains with my Introduc- 
tion, and I admit that it is no slouch of a performance. 

Then I came down to Chatto's, and found your all too 
beautiful letter, and was lifted higher than ever. Next 
came letters from America properly glorifying my Chris- 
tian Science article in the Cosmopolitan (and one roundly 
abusing it.) and a letter from John Brisben Walker enclos- 
ing $200 additional pay for the article (he had already paid 
enough, but I didn't mention that— which wasn't right 
of me, for this is the second time he has done such a thing, 
whereas Gilder has done it only once and no one else ever.) 
I make no prices with Walker and Gilder — I can trust 
them. 

And last of all came a letter from M — . How I do wish 
that man was in hell. Even the briefest line from that 
idiot puts me in a rage. 

But on the whole it has been a delightful day, and with 
M— in hell it would have been perfect. But that will 
happen, and I can wait. 

Ah, if I could look into the inside of people as you do, 
and put it on paper, and invent things for them to do and 
say, and tell how they said it, I could write a fine and 

687 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



readable book now, for I've got a prime subject. I've 
written 30,000 words of it and satisfied myself that the 
stuff is there; so I am going to discard that MS and begin 
all over again and have a good time with it. 

Oh, / know how you feel! I've been in hell myself. 
You are there to-night. By difference in time you are at 
luncheon, now — and not eating it. Nothing is so lone- 
some as gadding around platforming. I have declined 45 
lectures to-day — England and Scotland. I wanted 
the money, but not the torture. Good luck to you! — 
and repentance. 

With love to all of you— 

Mark. 



Digitized by Google 



XXXIX 



LETTERS OP I9OO, MAINLY TO TWICHELL. THE BOER WAR. 
BOXER TROUBLES. THE RETURN TO AMERICA 

THE New Year found Clemens still in London, chiefly in- 
terested in osteopathy and characteristically glorifying the 
practice at the expense of other healing methods. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

London, Jan. 8, 1000. 

Dear Joe, — Mental Telepathy has scored another. 
Mental Telegraphy will be greatly respected a century 
hence. 

By the accident of writing my sister and describing to 
her the remarkable cures made by Kellgren with his 
hands and without drugs, I brought upon myself a quite 
stunning surprise ; for she wrote to me that she had been 
taking this very treatment in Buffalo — and that it was 
an American invention. 

Well, it does really turn out that Dr. Still, in the middle 
of Kansas, in a village, began to experiment in 1874, only 
five years after Kellgren began the same work obscurely 
in the village of Gotha, in Germany. Dr. Still seems to 
be an honest man; therefore I am persuaded that Kell- 
gren moved him to his experiments by Mental Telegraphy 
across six hours of longitude, without need of a wire. By 
the time Still began to experiment, Kellgren had com- 
pleted his development of the principles of his system 
and established himself in a good practice in London — 
1874 — and was in good shape to convey his discovery to 
Kansas, Mental Telegraphically. 

689 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Yes, I was greatly surprised to find that my mare's nest 
was much in arrears: that this new science was well 
known in America under the name of Osteopathy. Since 
then, I find that in the past 3 years it has got itself legal- 
ized in 14 States in spite of the opposition of the physicians ; 
that it has established 20 Osteopathic schools and colleges ; 
that among its students are 75 allopathic physicians; that 
there is a school in Boston and another in Philadelphia, 
that there are about 700 students in the parent college 
(Dr. Still's at Kirksville, Missouri,) and that there are 
about 2,000 graduates practicing in America. Dear me, 
there are not 30 in Europe. Europe is so sunk in super- 
stitions and prejudices that it is an almost impossible 
thing to get her to do anything but scoff at a new thing — 
unless it come from abroad; as witness the telegraph, 
dentistry, &c. 

Presently the Osteopath will come over here from 
America and will soon make himself a power that must 
be recognized and reckoned with; and then, 25 years 
from now, England will begin to claim the invention and 
tell all about its origin, in the Cyclopedia B — as in the 
case of the telegraph, applied anaesthetics and the other 
benefactions which she heaped her abuse upon when her 
inventors first offered them to her. 

I cannot help feeling rather inordinately proud of 
America for the gay and hearty way in which she takes 
hold of any new thing that comes along and gives it a 
first rate trial. Many an ass in America is getting a deal 
of benefit out of X-Science's new exploitation of an age- 
old healing principle— faith, combined with the patient's 
imagination— let it boom along! I have no objection, 
Let them call it by what name they choose, so long as it 
does helpful work among the class which is numerically 
vastly the largest bulk of the human race, i.e. the fools, 
the idiots, the pudd'nheads. 

We do not guess, we know that 9 in 10 of the species 
are pudd'nheads. We know it by various evidences; and 
one of them is, that for ages the race has respected (and 

690 . 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



almost venerated) the physician's grotesque system — the 
emptying of miscellaneous and harmful drugs into a 
person's stomach to remove ailments which in many cases 
the drugs could not reach at all ; in many cases could 
reach and help, but only at cost of damage to some other 
part of the man; and in the remainder of the cases the 
drug either retarded the cure, or the disease was cured by 
nature in spite of the nostrums. The doctor's insane 
system has not only been permitted to continue its follies 
for ages, but has been protected by the State and made a 
close monopoly — an infamous thing, a crime against a 
free-man's proper right to choose his own assassin or his 
own method of defending his body against disease and 
death. 

And yet at the same time, with curious and senile 
inconsistency, the State has allowed the man to choose his 
own assassin — in one detail — the patent-medicine detail — 
making itself the protector of that perilous business, col- 
lecting money out of it, and appointing no committee of 
experts to examine the medicines and forbid them when 
extra dangerous. Really, when a man can prove that he 
is not a jackass, I think he is in the way to prove that he 
is no legitimate member of the race. 

I have by me a list of 52 human ailments — common 
ones — and in this list I count ig which the physician's 
art cannot cure. But there isn't one which Osteopathy 
or Kellgren cannot cure, if the patient comes early. 

Fifteen years ago I had a deep reverence for the physi- 
cian and the surgeon. But 6 monthsof closely watching the 
Kellgren business has revolutionized all that, and now I 
have neither reverence nor respect for the physician's 
trade, and scarcely any for the surgeon's, I am convinced 
that of all quackeries, the physician's is the grotesquest 
and the silliest. And they know they are shams and 
humbugs. They have taken the place of those augurs 
who couldn't look each other in the face without laughing. 

See what a powerful hold our ancient superstitions have 
upon us: two weeks ago, when Livy committed an incred- 

691 



Digitized by 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ible imprudence and by consequence was promptly stricken 
down with a heavy triple attack — influenza, bronchitis, 
and a lung affected — she recognized the gravity of the 
situation, and her old superstitions rose: she thought she 
ought to send for a doctor — Think of it — the last man in 
the world I should want around at such a time. Of 
course I did not say no — not that I was indisposed to 
take the responsibility, for I was not, my notion of a 
dangerous responsibility being quite the other way — 
but because it is unsafe to distress a sick person; I only 
said we knew no good doctor, and it could not be good 
policy to choose at hazard ; so she allowed me to send for 
Kellgren. To-day she is up and around — cured. It is 
safe to say that persons hit in the same way at the same 
time are in bed yet, and booked to stay there a good while, 
and to be in a shackly condition and afraid of their shadows 
for a couple of years or more to come. 

It will be seen by the foregoing that Mark Twain's interest 
in the Kellgren system was still an ardent one. Indeed, for a 
time he gave most of his thought to it, and wrote several long 
appreciations, perhaps with little idea of publication, but merely 
to get his enthusiasm physically expressed. War, however, 
presently supplanted medicine — the Boer troubles in South 
Africa and the Boxer insurrection in China. It was a disturbing, 
exciting year. 

To W. D. Howells, in Boston: 

Wellington Court, Knights bridge, 

Jan. 2$ t i goo. 

Dear Howells, — If you got half as much as Pond 
prophesied, be content and praise God — it has not hap- 
pened to another. But I am sorry he didn't go with you; 
for it is marvelous to hear him yarn. He is good company, 
cheery and hearty, and his mill is never idle. Your doing 
a lecture tour was heroic. It was the highest order of 
grit, and you have a right to be proud of yourself. No 
amount of applause or money or both could save it from 

692 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



being a hell to a man constituted as you are. It is that 
even to me, who am made of coarser stuff. 

I knew the audiences would come forward and shake 
hands with you — that one infallible sign of sincere ap- 
proval. In all my life, wherever it failed me I left the hall 
sick and ashamed, knowing what it meant. 
/ Privately speaking, this is a sordid and criminal war, 
and in every way shameful and excuseless. Every day 
I write (in my head) bitter magazine articles about it, 
but I have to stop with that. For England must not fall; 
it would mean an inundation of Russian and German 
political degradations which would envelop the globe and 
steep it in a sort of Middle-Age night and slavery which 
would last till Christ comes again. Even wrong— and she 
is wrong — England must be upheld. He is an enemy of 
the human race who shall speak against her now. Why 
was the human race created? Or at least why wasn't 
something creditable created in place of it. God had his 
opportunity. He could have made a reputation. But no, 
He must commit this grotesque folly — a lark which must 
have cost him a regret or two when He came to think it 
over and observe effects. For a giddy and unbecoming 
caprice there has been nothing like it till this war. I talk 
the war with both sides — always waiting until the other 
man introduces the topic. Then I say "My head is with 
the Briton, but my heart and such rags of morals as I have 
are with the Boer— now we will talk, unembarrassed and 
without prejudice." And so we discuss, and have no 
trouble. 

Jan. 26. 

It was my intention to make some disparaging remarks 
about the human race; and so I kept this letter open for 
that purpose, and for the purpose of telling my dream, 
wherein the Trinity were trying to guess a conundrum, 
but I can do better — for I can snip out of the "Times" 
various samples and side-lights which bring the race down 
to date, and expose it as of yesterday. If you will notice, 

693 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

there is seldom a telegram in a paper which fails to show 
up one or more members and beneficiaries of our Civiliza- 
tion as promenading in his shirt-tail, with the rest of his 
regalia in the wash. 

I love to see the holy ones air their smug pieties and 
admire them and smirk over them, and at the same 
moment frankly and publicly show their contempt for 
the pieties of the Boer — confidently expecting the approval 
of the country and the pulpit, and getting it. 

I notice that God is on both sides in this war; thus 
history repeats itself. But I am the only person who has 
noticed this; everybody here thinks He is playing the 
game for this side, and for this side only. 

With great love to you all 

Mark. 

One cannot help wondering what Mark Twain would have 
thought of human nature had he lived to see the great World 
War, fought mainly by the Christian nations who for nearly 
two thousand years had been preaching peace on earth and good- 
will toward men. But his opinion of the race could hardly 
have been worse than it was. And nothing that human beings 
could do would have surprised him. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

London, Jan. 27 % igoo. 

Dear Joe— Apparently we are not proposing to set 
the Filipinos free and give their islands to them; and 
apparently we are not proposing to hang the priests and 
confiscate their property. If these things are so, the war 
out there has no interest for me. 

I have just been examining chapter LXX of " Following 
the Equator," to see if the Boer's old military effectiveness 
is holding out. It reads curiously as if it had been written 
about the present war. 

I believe that in the next chapter my notion of the 
Boer was rightly conceived. He is popularly called unciv- 
ilized, I do not know why. Happiness, food, shelter, 

• 694 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

dothing, wholesale labor, modest and rational ambitions, 
honesty, kindliness, hospitality, love of freedom and 
limitless courage to fight for it, composure and fortitude 
in time of disaster, patience in time of hardship and 
privation, absence of noise and brag in time of victory, 
contentment with a humble and peaceful life void of 
insane excitements — if there is a higher and better form 
of civilization than this, I am not aware of it and do not 
know where to look for it. I suppose we have the habit 
of imagining that a lot of artistic, intellectual and other 
artificialities must be added, or it isn't complete. We 
and the English have these latter; but as we lack the 
great bulk of these others, I think the Boer civilization 
is the best of the two. My idea of our civilization is that 
it is a shabby poor thing and full of cruelties, vanities, 
arrogancies, meannesses, and hypocrisies. As for the 
word, I hate the sound of it, for it conveys a lie; and as 
for the thing itself, I wish it was in hell, where it belongs. 

Provided we could get something better in the place of 
it. But that is not possible, perhaps. Poor as it is, it is 
better than real savagery, therefore we must stand by it, 
extend it, and (in public) praise it. And so we must not 
utter any hateful word about England in these days, nor 
fail to hope that she will win in this war, for her defeat 
and fall would be an irremediable disaster for the mangy 
human race. Naturally, then, I am for England; but 
she is profoundly in the wrong, Joe, and no (instructed) 
Englishman doubts it. At least that is my belief. 



Maybe I managed to make myself misunderstood, as 
to the Osteopathists. I wanted to know how the men 
impress you. As to their art, I know fairly well about 
that, and 9hould not value Hartford's opinion of it; nor 
a physician's; nor that of another who proposed to 
enlighten me out of his ignorance. Opinions based upon 
theory, superstition and ignorance are not very precious. 

Livy and the others are off for the country for a day or 
two. Love to you all Mark. 

695 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The next letter affords a pleasant variation. Without doubt 
it was written on realizing that good nature and enthusiasm had 
led him into indiscretion. This was always happening to him. 
and letters like this are not infrequent, though generally less 
entertaining. 

To Mr. Ann, in London: 

Wellington Court, Feb. 2j, 'oo. 

Dear Mr. Ann, — Upon sober second thought, it won't 
do ! — I withdraw that letter. Not because I said anything 
in it which is not true, for I didn't; but because when I 
allow my name to be used in forwarding a stock-scheme 
I am assuming a certain degree of responsibility as toward 
the investor, and I am not willing to do that. I have 
another objection, a purely selfish one: trading upon my 
name, whether the enterprise scored a success or a failure 
would damage me. I can't afford that; even the Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury couldn't afford it, and he has more 
character to spare than I have. (Ah, a happy thought* 
If he would sign the letter with me that would change the 
whole complexion of the thing, of course. I do not know 
him, yet I would sign any commercial scheme that he 
would sign. As he does not know me, it follows that he 
would sign anything that I would sign. This is unassail- 
able logic — but really that is all that can be said for it.) 

No, I withdraw the letter. This virgin is pure up to 
date, and is going to remain so. 

Ys sincerely, S. L. C. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Wellington Court, 
Knightsbridge, Mch. 4, *oa. 

Dear Joe, — Henry Robinson's death is a sharp wound 
to me, and it goes very deep. I had a strong affection 
for him, and I think he had for me. Every Friday, three- 
fourths of the year for 16 years he was of the billiard-party 
in our house. When we come home, how shall we have 
billiard-nights again — with no Ned Bunce and no Henry 

696 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Robinson? I believe I could not endure that. We must 
find another use for that room. Susy is gone, George is 
gone, Libby Hamersley, Ned Bunce, Henry Robinson. 
The friends are passing, one by one; our house, where 
such warm blood and such dear blood flowed so freely, 
is become a cemetery. But not in any repellent sense. 
Our dead are welcome there; their life made it beautiful, 
their death has hallowed it, we shall have them with us 
always, and there will be nc parting. 

It was a moving address you made over Ward Cheney 
— that fortunate youth! Like Susy, he got out of life all 
that was worth the living, and got his great reward before 
he had crossed the tropic frontier of dreams and entered 
the Sahara of fact. The deep consciousness of Susy's 
good fortune is a constant comfort to me. 

London is happy-hearted at last. The British victories 
have swept the clouds away and there are no uncheerful 
faces. For three months the private dinner parties (we 
go to no public ones) have been Lodges of Sorrow, and 
just a little depressing sometimes; but now they are 
smily and animated again. Joe, do you know the Irish 
gentleman and the Irish lady, the Scotch gentleman and 
the Scotch lady? These are darlings, every one. Night 
before last it was all Irish — 24. One would have to travel 
far to match their ease and sociability and animation 
and sparkle and absence of shyness and self-consciousness. 

It was American in these fine qualities. This was at 
Mr. Lecky's. He is Irish, you know. Last night it was 
Irish again, at Lady Gregory's. Lord Roberts is Irish; 
and Sir William Butler; and Kitchener, I think; and a 
disproportion of the other prominent Generals are of 
Irish and Scotch breed— keeping up the traditions of 
Wellington, and Sir Colin Campbell of the Mutiny. You 
will have noticed that in S. A. as in the Mutiny, it is 
usually the Irish and the Scotch that are placed in the 
fore-front of the battle. An Irish friend of mine says this 
is because the Kelts are idealists, and enthusiasts, with 
age-old heroisms to emulate and keep bright before the 

697 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



world; but that the low-class Englishman is dull and 
without ideals, fighting bull-doggishly while he has a 
leader, but losing his head and going to pieces when his 
leader falls — not so with the Kelt. Sir Wm. Butler said 
"the Kelt is the spear-head of the British lance." 

Love to you all. 

Mark. 

The Henry Robinson mentioned in the foregoing letter was 
Henry C. Robinson, one-time Governor of Connecticut, long a 
dear and intimate friend of the Clemens household. " Lecky m 
was W. E. H. Lecky, the Irish historian whose History cf 
European Morals had been, for many years, one of Mark Twain's 
favorite books. 

In July the Clemenses left the small apartment at 30 Welling- 
ton Court and established a summer household a little way out 
of London, at Dollis Hill. To-day the place has been given to 
the public under the name of Gladstone Park, so called for the 
reason that in an earlier time Gladstone had frequently visited 
there. It was a beautiful spot, a place of green grass and spread- 
ing oaks. In a letter in which Mrs. Clemens wrote to her sister 
she said: "It is simply divinely beautiful and peaceful; the 
great, old trees are beyond everything. I believe nowhere in 
the world do you find such trees as in England." Clemens wrote 
to Twichell: "From the house you can see little but spacious 
stretches of hay-fields and green turf. . . . Yet the massed, brick 
blocks of London are reachable in three minutes on a horse. Bv 
rail we can be in the heart of London, in Baker Street, in seven- 
teen minutes — by a smart train in five." 

Mail, however, would seem to have been less prompt. 

To the Editor of the Times, in London: 

Sir, — It has often been claimed that the London postal 
service was swifter than that of New York, and I have 
always believed that the claim was justified. But a doubt 
has lately sprung up in my mind. I live eight miles from 
Printing House Square; the Times leaves that point at 
4 o'clock in the morning, by mail, and reaches me at 5 in 
the afternoon, thus making the trip in thirteen hours. 

698 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

It is my conviction that in New York we should do it in 
eleven. 
Dolus Hill, N. W. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell in Hartford: 

Dolus Hill House, Kilburn, N. W. 

London, Aug. 12, '00. 

Dbar Job,— The Sages Prof. Fiske and Brander Mat- 
thews were out here to tea a week ago and it was a breath 
of American air to see them. We furnished them a bright 
day and comfortable weather— and they used it all up, 
in their extravagant American way. Since then we have 
sat by coal fires, evenings. 

We shall sail for home sometime in October, but shall 
winter in New York where we can have an osteopath of 
good repute to continue the work of putting this family 
in proper condition. 

Livy and I dined with the Chief Justice a month ago 
and he was as well-conditioned as an athlete. 

It is all China, now, and my sympathies are with the 
Chinese. They have been villainously dealt with by the 
sceptred thieves of Europe, and I hope they will drive all 
the foreigners out and keep them out for good. I only 
wish it; of course I don't really expect it. 

Why, hang it, it occurs to me that by the time we 
reach New York you Twichells will be invading Europe 
and once more we shall miss the connection. This is 
thoroughly exasperating. Aren't we ever going to meet 
again ? 

With no end of love from all of us, 

Mark. 

P. S. Aug. 18. 

Dear Job —It is 7.30 a. m. I have been waking very 
early, lately. If it occurs once more, it will be habit ; then 
I will submit and adopt it. 

This is our day of mourning. It is four years since 
Susy died; it is five years and a month that I saw her 

699 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



alive for the last time — throwing kisses at us from the 
railway platform when we started West around the world. 
Sometimes it is a century; sometimes it was yesterday. 

With love 

Mark. 

We discover in the foregoing letter that the long European 
residence was drawing to an end. More than nine years had 
passed since the closing of the Hartford house — eventful years 
that had seen failure, bereavement, battle with debt, and rehabili- 
tated fortunes. All the family were anxious to get home — Mark 
Twain most anxious of all. 

They closed Dollis Hill House near the end of September, and 
put up for a brief period at a family hotel, an amusing picture oi 
which follows. 

To J. Y. M. MacAlister, in London: 

Sep. iqoo. 

My dear MacAlister, — We do really start next 
Saturday. I meant to sail earlier, but waited to finish 
some studies of what are called Family Hotels. They are 
a London specialty, God has not permitted them to exist 
elsewhere ; they are ramshackle clubs which were dwellings 
at the time of the Heptarchy. Dover and Albemarle 
Streets are filled with them. The once spacious rooms are 
split up into coops which afford as much discomfort as 
can be had anywhere out of jail for any money. All the 
modem inconveniences are furnished, and some that have 
been obsolete for a century. The prices are astonishingly 
high for what you get. The bedrooms are hospitals for 
incurable furniture. I find it so in this one. They exist 
upon a tradition; they represent the vanishing home-like 
inn of fifty years ago, and are mistaken by foreigners fee 
it. Some quite respectable Englishmen still frequer: 
them through inherited habit and arrested development, 
many Americans also, through ignorance and superstition 
The rooms are as interesting as the Tower of London, but 
older I think. Older and dearer. The lift was a gift at 

700 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



William the Conqueror, some of the beds are prehistoric. 
They represent geological periods. Mine is the oldest. 
It is formed in strata of Old Red Sandstone, volcanic tufa, 
ignis fatuus, and bicarbonate of hornblende, superimposed 
upon argillaceous shale, and contains the prints of pre- 
historic man. It is in No. 149. Thousands of scientists 
come to see it. They consider it holy. They want to 
blast out the prints but cannot. Dynamite rebounds 
from it. 

Finished studies and sail Saturday in Minnehaha. 

Yours ever affectionately, 

Mark Twain. 

They sailed for New York October 6th, and something more 
than a week later America gave them a royal welcome. The 
press, far and wide, sounded Mark Twain's praises once more; 
dinners and receptions were offered on every hand; editors and 
lecture agents clamored for him. 

The family settled in the Earlington Hotel during a period of 
house-hunting. They hoped eventually to return to Hartford, 
but after a brief visit paid by Clemens alone to the old place 
he wrote; 

To Sylvester Baxter, in Boston: 

New York, Oct. 26, 2000. 
Dear Mr. Baxter, — It was a great pleasure to me to 
renew the other days with you, and there was a pathetic 
pleasure in seeing Hartford and the house again; but I 
realize that if we ever enter the house again to live, our 
hearts will break. I am not sure that we shall ever be 
strong enough to endure that strain. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Mr. and Mrs. Rogers wished to have them in their neighbor- 
hood, but the houses there were not suitable, or were too expen- 
sive. Through Mr. Frank Doubleday they eventually found, 
at 14 West Tenth Street, a large residence handsomely furnished, 
and this they engaged for the winter. "We were lucky to get 
IL— IT 70I 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

this big house furnished," he wrote MacAlister in London. 
"There was not another one in town procurable that would 
answer us, but this one is all right — space enough in it for several 
families, the rooms all old-fashioned, great size." 

The little note that follows shows that Mark Twain had no* 
entirely forgotten the days of Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn. 

To a Neighbor on West Tenth Street, New York: 

Nov. jo. 

Dear Madam, — I know I ought to respect my duty and 
perform it, but I am weak and faithless where boys are 
concerned, and I can't help secretly approving pretty bad 
and noisy ones, though I do object to the kind that ring 
door-bells. My family try to get me to stop the boys 
from holding conventions on the front steps, but I basely 
shirk out of it, because I think the boys enjoy it. 

My wife has been complaining to me this evening about 
the boys on the front steps and under compulsion I have 
made some promises. But I am very forgetful, now that 
I am old, and my sense of duty is getting spongy. 

Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemeks. 



Digitized by Google 



XL 



LETTERS OP 1001, CHIEFLY TO TWICHELL. MARK TWAIN 
AS A REFORMER. SUMMER AT SARANAC. ASSAS- 
SINATION OP PRESIDENT McKINLEY 



N editorial in the Louisville Courier-Journal, early in iooi, 



J"\ said: "A remarkable transformation, or rather a develop- 
ment, has taken place in Mark Twain. The genial humorist of 
the earlier day is now a reformer of the vigorous kind, a sort of 
knight errant who does not hesitate to break a lance with either 
Church or State if he thinks them interposing on that broad 
highway over which he believes not a part but the whole of 
mankind has the privilege of passing in the onward march of 
the ages." 

Mark Twain had begun "breaking the lance" very soon after 
his return from Europe. He did not believe that he could reform 
the world, but at least he need not withhold his protest against 
those things which stirred his wrath. He began by causing the 
arrest of a cabman who had not only overcharged but insulted 
him; he continued by writing openly against the American 
policy in the Philippines, the missionary propaganda which 
had resulted in the Chinese uprising and massacre, and against 
Tammany politics. Not all of his efforts were in the line of 
reform; he had become a sort of general spokesman which the 
public flocked to hear, whatever the subject. On the occasion 
of a Lincoln Birthday service at Carnegie Hall he was chosen to 
preside, and he was obliged to attend more dinners than were 
good for his health . His letters of this period were mainly written 
to his old friend Twichell, in Hartford. Howells, who lived in 
New York, he saw with considerable frequency. 

In the letter which follows the medicine which Twichell was 
to take was Plasmon, an English proprietary remedy in which 
Mark Twain had invested— a panacea for all human ills which 
osteopathy could not reach. 




703 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To Rev. Joseph Twichell, in Hartford: 

14 W. ioth St. Jan. 23, 'oi. 

Dear Joe, — Certainly. I used to take it in my coffee, 
but it settled to the bottom in the form of mud, and I 
had to eat it with a spoon ; so I dropped the custom and 
took my 2 teaspoonfuls in cold milk after breakfast. If 
we were out of milk I shoveled the dry powder into my 
mouth and washed it down with water. The only essen- 
tial is to get it down, the method is not important. 

No, blame it, I can't go to the Alumni dinner, Joe. It 
takes two days, and I can't spare the time. Moreover I 
preside at the Lincoln birthday celebration in Carnegie 
Hall Feb. 1 1 and I must not make two speeches so close 
together. Think of it — two old rebels functioning there — I 
as President, and Watterson as Orator of the Day ! Things 
have changed somewhat in these 40 years, thank God. 

Look here — when you come down you must be our 
guest — we've got a roomy room for you, and Livy win 
make trouble if you go elsewhere. Come straight to 14 
West ioth. 

Jan. 24. Livy says Amen to that; also, can you give 
us a day or two's notice, so the room will be sure to be 
vacant? 

I'm going to stick close to my desk for a month, now, 
hoping to write a small book. Ys Ever Mark. 

lite letter which follows is a fair sample of Mark Twain's 
private violence on a subject which, in public print, he could 
only treat effectively by preserving his good humor. When he 
found it necessary to boil over, as he did, now and then, for 
relief, he always found a willing audience in Twichell. The 
mention of his "Private Philosophy" refers to What Is Uamf, 
privately published in 1906; reissued by his publishers in 1916. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

14 W. ioth Jan. 29, 'oi. 
Dear Joe, — . . . I'm not expecting anything but 
kicks for scoffing, and am expecting a diminution of my 

704 



Digitized by Google' 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



bread and butter by it, but if Livy will let me I will have 
my say. This nation is like all the others that have been 
spewed upon the earth — ready to shout for any cause that 
will tickle its vanity or fill its pocket. What a hell of a 
heaven it will be, when they get all these hypocrites 
assembled there! 

/ can't understand it! You are a public guide and 
teacher, Joe, and are under a heavy responsibility to 
men, young and old; if you teach your people — as you 
teach me — to hide their opinions when they believe the 
flag is being abused and dishonored, lest the utterance 
do them and a publisher a damage, how do you answer 
for it to your conscience? You are sorry for me; in the 
fair way of give and take, I am willing to be a little sorry 
for you. 

However, I seem to be going counter to my own Private 
Philosophy — which Livy won't allow me to publish— 
because it would destroy me. But I hope to see it in 
print before I die. I planned it 1 5 years ago, and wrote it 
in '98. I've often tried to read it to Livy, but she won't 
have it; it makes her melancholy. The truth always has 
that effect on people. Would have, anyway, if they ever 
got hold of a rag of it— Which they don't. 

You are supposing that I am supposing that I am 
moved by a Large Patriotism, and that I am distressed 
because our President has blundered up to his neck in the 
Philippine mess ; and that I am grieved because this great 
big ignorant nation, which doesn't know even the A B 
C facts of the Philippine episode, is in disgrace before the 
sarcastic world — drop that idea! I care nothing for the 
rest — I am only distressed and troubled because I am 
befouled by these things. That is all. When I search 
myself away down deep, I find this out. Whatever a man 
feels or thinks or does, there is never any but one reason 
for it — and that is a selfish one. 

At great inconvenience, and expense of precious time 
I went to the chief synagogue the other night and talked 
in the interest of a charity school of poor Jew girls. I 

705 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



know — to the finest shades — the selfish ends that moved 
me; but no one else suspects. I could give you the 
details if I had time. You would perceive how true they 
are. 

I've written another article; you better hurry down 
and help Livy squelch it. 

She's out pottering around somewhere, poor house- 
keeping slave ; and Clara is in the hands of the osteopath, 
getting the bronchitis pulled and hauled out of her. It 
was a bad attack, and a little disquieting. It came day 
before yesterday, and she hasn't sat up till this afternoon. 
She is getting along satisfactorily, now. 

Lots of love to you all. 

Mark. 

Mark Twain's religion had to do chiefly with humanity in its 
present incarnation, and concerned itself very little with any 
possible measure of reward or punishment in some supposed 
court of the hereafter. Nevertheless, psychic investigation 
always interested him, and he was good-naturedly willing to 
explore, even hoping, perhaps, to be convinced that individu- 
ality continues beyond death. The letter which follows indi- 
cates his customary attitude in relation to spiritualistic research. 
The experiments here mentioned, however, were not satisfactory. 

To Mrs. Charles McQuiston: 

Dobbs Perry, N. Y. 

March 26, toot. 

Dear Mrs. McQuiston, — I have never had an experi- 
ence which moved me to believe the living can communi- 
cate with the dead, but my wife and I have experimented 
in the matter when opportunity offered and shall continue 
to do so. 

I enclose a letter which came this morning — the second 
from the same source. Mrs. K— is a Missourian, and 
lately she discovered, by accident, that she was a remark- 
able hypnotiser. Her best subject is a Missouri girl, Miss 
White, who is to come here soon and sustain strictly 

706 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



scientific tests before professors at Columbia University. 
Mrs. Clemens and I intend to be present. And we shall 
ask the pair to come to our house to do whatever things 
they can do. Meantime, if you thought well of it, you 
might write her and arrange a meeting, telling her it is by 
my suggestion and that I gave you her address. 

Someone has told me that Mrs. Piper is discredited. I 
cannot be sure, but I think it was Mr. Myers, President 
of the London Psychical Research Society — we heard of 
his death yesterday. He was a spiritualist. I am afraid 
he was a very easily convinced man. We visited two 
mediums whom he and Andrew Lang considered quite 
wonderful, but they were quite transparent frauds. 

Mrs. Clemens corrects me: One of those women was a 
fraud, the other not a fraud, but only an innocent, well- 
meaning, driveling vacancy. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

In Mark Twain's Bermuda chapters entitled Idle Notts of an 
IdU Excursion he tells of an old sea captain, one Hurricane 
Jones, who explained biblical miracles in a practical, even if 
somewhat startling, fashion. In his story of the prophets of 
Baal, for instance, the old captain declared that the burning 
water was nothing more nor less than petroleum. Upon reading 
the "notes," Professor Phelps of Yale wrote that the same 
method of explaining miracles had been offered by Sir Thomas 
Browne. 

Perhaps it may be added that Captain Hurricane Jones also 
appears in Roughing It, as Captain Ned Blakely. 

To Professor William Lyon Plielps: 

Yale University, 
New York, April 24, 1001. 

My dear Sir,— I was not aware that old Sir Thomas 
had anticipated that story, and I am much obliged to 
you for furnishing me the paragraph. It is curious that 
the same idea should have entered two heads so unlike 

707 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



as the head of that wise old philosopher and that at 
Captain Ned Wakeman, a splendidly uncultured old 
sailor, but in his own opinion a thinker by divine right. 
He was an old friend of mine of many years' standing; 
I made two or three voyages with him, and found him a 
darling in many ways. The petroleum story was not told 
to me; he told it to Joe Twichell, who ran across him by 
accident on a sea voyage where I think the two were the 
only passengers. A delicious pair, and admirably mated, 
they took to each other at once and became as thick as 
thieves. Joe was passing under a fictitious name, and old 
Wakeman didn't suspect that he was a parson; so he 
gave his profanity full swing, and he was a master of that 
great art. You probably know Twichell, and will know 
that that is a kind of refreshment which he is very capable 
of enjoying. Sincere i y yours , 

S. L. Clemens. 

For the summer Clemens and his family found a comfortable 
lodge in the Adirondacks — a log cabin called 44 The Lair " — an 
Saranac Lake. Soon after his arrival there he received an invita- 
tion to attend the celebration of Missouri's eightieth anniversary. 
He sent the following letter: 

To Edward L. Ditnmitt, in St. Louis: 

Among the Adirondack Lakes, July 10, igoi. 

Dear Mr. Dimmitt, — By an error in the plans, things 
go wrong end first in this world, and much precious time 
is lost and matters of urgent importance are fatally 
retarded. Invitations which a brisk young fellow should 
get, and which would transport him with joy, are delayed 
and impeded and obstructed until they are fifty years 
overdue when they reach him. 

It has happened again in this case. 

When I was a boy in Missouri I was always on the look- 
out for invitations but they always miscarried and west 
wandering through the aisles of time; and now they are 

708 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



arriving when I am old and rheumatic and can't travel 
and must lose my chance. 

I have lost a world of delight through this matter of 
delaying invitations. Fifty years ago I would have gone 
eagerly across the world to help celebrate anything that 
might turn up. It would have made no difference to me 
what it was, so that I was there and allowed a chance to 
make a noise. 

The whole scheme of things is turned wrong end to. 
Life should begin with age and its privileges and accumula- 
tions, and end with youth and its capacity to splendidly 
enjoy such advantages. As things are now, when in youth 
a dollar would bring a hundred pleasures, you can't have 
it. When you are old, you get it and there is nothing 
worth buying with it then. 

It's an epitome of life. The first half of it consists of 
the capacity to enjoy witheut the chance; the last half 
consists of the chance without the capacity. 

I am admonished in many ways that time is pushing 
me inexorably along. I am approaching the threshold 
of age; in 1977 I shall be 142. This is no time to be flitting 
about the earth. I must cease from the activities proper 
to youth and begin to take on the dignities and gravities 
and inertia proper to that season of honorable senility 
which is on its way and imminent as indicated above. 

Yours is a great and memorable occasion, and as a son 
of Missouri I should hold it a high privilege to be there 
and share your just pride in the state's achievements; 
but I must deny myself the indulgence, while thanking 
you earnestly for the prized honor you have done me in 
asking me to be present. 

Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

In the foregoing Mark Twain touches upon one of his favorite 
fancies : that life should begin with old age and approach strong 
manhood, golden youth, to end at last with pampered and 
beloved babyhood. Possibly he contemplated writing a story 
with this idea as the theme, but he seems never to have done so. 

709 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

The reader who has followed these letters may remember 
Yung Wing, who had charge of the Chinese educational mission 
in Hartford, and how Mark Twain, with Twichell, called cc 
General Grant in behalf of the mission. Yung Wing, nam 
returned to China, had conceived the idea of making an appeal 
to the Government of the United States for relief of his starving 
countrymen. 

To J. H. Twichell in Hartford: 

Ampersand, N. Y., Jtdy 28, '01. 

Dear Joe, — As you say, it is impracticable — in my 
case, certainly. For me to assist in an appeal to that 
Congress of land-thieves and liars would be to bring 
derision upon it; and for me to assist in an appeal for 
cash to pass through the hands of those missionaries out 
there, of any denomination, Catholic or Protestant, 
wouldn't do at all. They wouldn't handle money which 
I had soiled, and I wouldn't trust them with it, anyway. 
They would devote it to the relief of suffering — I know 
that — but the sufferers selected would be converts. The 
missionary-utterances exhibit no humane feeling toward 
the others, but in place of it a spirit of hate and hostility. 
And it is natural; the Bible forbids their presence there, 
their trade is unlawful, why shouldn't their characters be 
of necessity in harmony with — but never mind, let it go, 
it irritates me. 

Later. I have been reading Yung Wing's letter again. 
It may be that he is over-wrought by his sympathies, 
but it may not be so. There may be other reasons why 
the missionaries are silent about the Shensi-2-year famine 
and cannibalism. It may be that there are so few Protes- 
tant converts there that the missionaries are able to take 
care of them. That they are not likely to largely con- 
cern themselves about Catholic converts and the others, 
is quite natural, I think. 

That crude way of appealing to this Government for 
help in a cause which has no money in it, and no politics, 

710 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



rises before me again in all its admirable innocence! 
Doesn't Yung Wing know us yet? However, he has 
been absent since '96 or '07. We have gone to hell since 
then. Kossuth couldn't raise 30 cents in Congress, now, 
if he were back with his moving Magyar-Tale. 

I am on the front porch (lower one — main deck) of our 
little bijou of a dwelling-house. The lake-edge (Lower 
Saranac) is so nearly under me that I can't see the shore, 
but only the water, small-poxed with rain-splashes — for 
there is a heavy down-pour. It is charmingly like sitting 
smuggled up on a ship's deck with the stretching sea all 
around — but very much more satisfactory, for at sea a 
rain-storm is depressing, while here of course the effect 
engendered is just a deep sense of comfort and content- 
ment. The heavy forest shuts us solidly in on three sides 
— there are no neighbors. There are beautiful little tan- 
colored impudent squirrels about. They take tea, 5 p. m., 
(not invited) at the table in the woods where Jean does 
my typewriting, and one of them has been brave enough 
to sit upon Jean's knee with his tail curved over his back 
and munch his food. They come to dinner, 7 p. m., on 
the front porch (not invited). They all have the one 
name— Blennerhasset, from Burr's friend— and none of 
them answers to it except when hungry. 

We have been here since June 21st. For a little while 
we had some warm days — according to the family's esti- 
mate; I was hardly discommoded myself. Otherwise 
the weather has been of the sort you are familiar with in 
these regions: cool days and cool nights. We have heard 
of the hot wave every Wednesday, per the weekly paper — 
we allow no dailies to intrude. Last week through visitors 
also — the only ones we have had — Dr. Root and John 
Howells. 

We have the daily lake-swim; and all the tribe, ser- 
vants included (but not I) do a good deal of boating; 
sometimes with the guide, sometimes without him — Jean 
and Clara are competent with the oars. If we live another 
year, I hope we shall spend its summer in this house. 

7" 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



We have taken the Appleton country seat, overlooking 
the Hudson, at Riverdale, 25 minutes from the Grand 
Central Station, for a year, beginning Oct. 1, with option 
for another year. We are obliged to be close to New York 
for a year or two. 

Aug. 3rd. I go yachting a fortnight up north in a 20- 
knot boat 225 feet long, with the owner, (Mr. Rogers), 
Tom Reid, Dr. Rice, Col. A. G. Paine and one or two 
others. Judge Howland would go, but can't get away 
from engagements; Professor Sloane would go, but is in 
the grip of an illness. Come — will you go? If you can 
manage it, drop a post-card to me c/o H. H. Rogers, 26 
Broadway. I shall be in New York a couple of days 
before we sail — July 31 or Aug. 1, perhaps the latter, — 
and I think I shall stop at the Hotel Grosvenor, cor. 10th 
st and 5th ave. 

We all send you and the Harmonies lots and gobs of 
love. Mark. 

To Rev. 7. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Ampersand, N. Y., Aug. 28. 
Dear Joe, — Just a word, to scoff at you, with your 
extravagant suggestion that I read the biography of 
Phillips Brooks — the very dullest book that has been 
printed for a century. Joe, ten pages of Mrs. Cheney's 
masterly biography of her father 1 — no, five pages of it — 
contain more meat, more sense, more literature, more 
brilliancy, than that whole basketful of drowsy rubbish 
put together. Why, in that dead atmosphere even 
Brooks himself is dull — he wearied me; oh how he wearied 
me! 

We had a noble good time in the Yacht, and caught 
a Chinese missionary and drowned him. 

Love from us all to you all. 

Mark. 

*Dr. Horace Bushnell, of Hartford. 
712 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The assassination of President McKinley occurred September 
6, 1901. Such an event would naturally stir Mark Twain to 
comment on human nature in general. His letter to Twichell 
is as individual as it is sound in philosophy. At what period 
of his own life, or under what circumstances, he made the long 
journey with tragic intent there is no means of knowing now. 
There is no other mention of it elsewhere in the records that 
survive mm. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Ampersand, Tuesday, (Sept. 10, 1001) 
Dear Joe, — It is another off day, but tomorrow I shall 
resume work to a certainty, and bid a long farewell to 
letter-scribbling. 

The news of the President looks decidedly hopeful, 
and we are all glad, and the household faces are much 
improved, as to cheerfulness. Oh, the talk in the news- 
papers! Evidently the Human Race is the same old 
Human Race. And how unjust, and unreflectingly dis- 
criminating, the talkers are. Under the unsettling effects 
of powerful emotion the talkers are saying wild things, 
crazy things — they are out of themselves, and do not 
know it; they are temporarily insane, yet with one voice 
they declare the assassin sane — a man who has been 
entertaining fiery and reason-debauching maggots in his 
head for weeks and months. Why, no one is sane, straight 
along, year in and year out, and we all know it. Our 
insanities are of varying sorts, and express themselves in 
varying forms — fortunately harmless forms as a rule — 
but in whatever form they occur an immense upheaval 
of feeling can at any time topple us distinctly over the 
sanity-line for a little while; and then if our form happens 
to be of the murderous kind we must look out — and so 
must the spectator. 

This ass with the unpronounceable name was probably 
more insane than usual this week or two back, and may 
get back upon his bearings by and by, but he was over 
the sanity-border when be shot the President. It is pos- 

713 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



sible that it has taken him the whole interval since the 
murder of the King of Italy to get insane enough to 
attempt the President's life. Without a doubt some 
thousands of men have been meditating the same act 
in the same interval, but new and strong interests have 
intervened and diverted their over-excited minds long 
enough to give them a chance to settle, and tranquilixe, 
and get back upon a healthy level again. Every extraor- 
dinary occurrence unsettles the heads of hundreds of 
thousands of men for a few moments or hours or days. 
If there had been ten kings around when Humbert fell 
they would have been in great peril for a day or more — 
and from men in whose presence they would have been 
quite safe after the excess of their excitement had had an 
interval in which to cool down. I bought a revolver once 
and travelled twelve hundred miles to kill a man. He 
was away. He was gone a day. With nothing else to 
do, I had to stop and think— and did. Within an hour— 
within half of it — I was ashamed of myself — and felt 
unspeakably ridiculous. I do not know what to call it if 
I was not insane. During a whole week my head was in 
a turmoil night and day fierce enough and exhausting 
enough to upset a stronger reason than mine. 

All over the world, every day, there are some millions 
of men in that condition temporarily. And in that time 
there is always a moment—perhaps only a single one — 
when they would do murder if their man was at hand. 
If the opportunity comes a shade too late, the chances 
are that it has come permanently too late. Opportunity 
seldom comes exactly at the supreme moment. This 
saves a million lives a day in the world — for sure. 

No Ruler is ever slain but the tremendous details of it 
are ravenously devoured by a hundred thousand men 
whose minds dwell, unaware, near the temporary-insanity 
frontier— and over they go, now! There is a day — two 
days— three — during which no Ruler would be safe from 
perhaps the half of them; and there is a single moment 
wherein he would not be safe from any of them, no doubt 

714 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It may take this present shooting-case six months to 
breed another ruler-tragedy, but it will breed it. There is 
at least one mind somewhere which will brood, and wear, 
and decay itself to the killing-point and produce that 
tragedy. 

Every negro burned at the stake unsettles the excitable 
brain of another one — I mean the inflaming details of his 
crime, and the lurid theatricality of his exit do it — and 
the duplicate crime follows ; and that begets a repetition, 
and that one another one — and so on. Every lynch ing- 
account unsettles the brains of another set of excitable 
white men, and lights another pyre — 115 lynchings last 
year, 102 inside of 8 months this year; in ten years this 
will be habit, on these terms. 

Yes, the wild talk you see in the papers! And from 
men who are sane when not upset by overwhelming excite- 
ment. A U. S. Senator — Cullom — wants this Buffalo 
criminal lynched! It would breed other lynchingr — of 
men who are not dreaming of committing murders, now, 
and will commit none if Cullom will keep quiet and not 
provide the exciting cause. 

And a District Attorney wants a law which shall punish 
with death attempts upon a President's life — this, mind 
you, as a deterrent. It would have no effect — or the 
opposite one. The lunatic's mind-space is all occupied — 
as mine was — with the matter in hand; there is no room 
in it for reflections upon what may happen to him. That 
comes after the crime. 

It is the noise the attempt would make in the world 
that would breed the subsequent attempts, by unsettling 
the rickety minds of men who envy the criminal his vast 
notoriety — his obscure name tongued by stupendous 
Kings and Emperors — his picture printed everywhere, 
the trivialest details of his movements, what he eats, 
what he drinks; how he sleeps, what he says, cabled 
abroad over the whole globe at cost of fifty thousand 
dollars a day — and he only a lowly shoemaker yesterday! 
— like the assassin of the President of France — in debt 

715 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

three francs to his landlady, and insulted by her — and 
to-day she is proud to be able to say she knew him "as 
familiarly as you know your own brother," and glad to 
stand till she drops and pour out columns and pages of 
her grandeur and her happiness upon the eager interviewer. 

Nothing will check the lynchings and ruler-murder but 
absolute silence — the absence of pow-pow about them. 
How are you going to manage that? By gagging every 
witness and jamming him into a dungeon for life; by 
abolishing all newspapers; by exterminating all news- 
paper men; and by extinguishing God's most elegant 
invention, the Human Race. It is quite simple, quite 
easy, and I hope you will take a day off and attend to it, 
Joe. 

I blow a kiss to you, and am 

Lovingly Yours, 

Mark. 

When the Adirondack summer ended Clemens settled for 
/ the winter in the beautiful Appleton home at Riverdale-on-the- 
Hudson. It was a place of wide-spreading grass and shade — a 
house of ample room. They were established in it in time for 
Mark Twain to take an active interest in the New York elec- 
tions and assist a ticket for good government to defeat Tammany 
Hall. 



Digitized by Google 



XLI 



LETTERS OP 1902. RIVERDALE. YORK HARBOR. ILLNESS 

OP MRS. CLEMENS 

THE year 1902 was an eventful one for Mark Twain. In 
April he received a degree of LL.D. from the University 
of Missouri and returned to his native State to accept it. This 
was his last journey to the Mississippi River. During the 
summer Mrs. Clemens 's health broke down and illnesses of one 
sort or another visited other members of the family. Amid so 
much stress and anxiety Clemens had little time or inclination 
for work. He wrote not many letters and mainly somber ones. 
Once, by way of diversion, he worked out the idea of a curious 
club which he formed— its members to be young girls— girls for 
the most part whom he had never seen. They were elected 
without their consent from among those who wrote to him 
without his consent, and it is not likely that any one so chosen 
declined membership. One selection from his letters to the 
French member, Miss Helene Picard, of St.-Die\ France, will 
explain the club and present a side. of Mark Twain somewhat 
different from that found in most of his correspondence. 

To Miss Picard, in St.-Dti, France: 

Riverdale-on-the-Hudson, February 22, 1002. 

Dear Miss Helene, — If you will let me call you so, 
considering that my head is white and that I have grown- 
up daughters. Your beautiful letter has given me such 
deep pleasure! I will make bold to claim you for a friend 
and lock you up with the rest of my riches; for I am a 
miser who counts his spoil every day and hoards it secretly 
and adds to it when he can, and is grateful to see it grow. 

Some of that gold comes, like yourself, in a sealed 

11.— is 717 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



package, and I can't see it and may never have the 
happiness; but I know its value without that, and by 
what sum it increases my wealth. 

I have a Club, a private Club, which is all my own. I 
appoint the Members myself, and they can't help them- 
selves, because I don't allow them to vote on their own 
appointment and I don't allow them to resign! They 
are all friends whom I have never seen (save one), but 
who have written friendly letters to me. 

By the laws of my Club there can be only one Member 
in each country, and there can be no male Member but 
myself. Some day I may admit males, but I don't know 
— they are capricious and inharmonious, and their ways 
provoke me a good deal. It is a matter which the Club 
shall decide. 

I have made four appointments in the past three or 
four months: You as Member for France, a young 
Highland girl as Member for Scotland, a Mohammedan 
girl as Member for Bengal, and a dear and bright youns 
niece of mine as Member for the United States — for I 
do not represent a country myself, but am merely Member 
at Large for the Human Race. 

You must not try to resign, for the laws of the Club 
do not allow that. You must console yourself by remem- 
bering that you are in the best of company; that nobody 
knows of your membership except myself — that no 
Member knows another's name, but only her country; 
that no taxes are levied and no meetings held (but how 
dearly I should like to attend one!). 

One of my Members is a Princess of a royal house, 
another is the daughter of a village book-seller on the 
continent of Europe. For the only qualification for 
Membership is intellect and the spirit of good will ; other 
distinctions, hereditary or acquired, do not count. 

May I send you the Constitution and Laws of the 
Club? I shall be so pleased if I may. It is a document 
which one of my daughters typewrites for me when I need 
one for a new Member, and she would give her eyebrows 

718 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



to know what it is all about, but I strangle her curiosity 
by saying: "There are much cheaper typewriters than 
you are, my dear, and if you try to pry into the sacred 
mysteries of this Club one of your prosperities will perish 
sure." 

My favorite ? It is " Joan of Arc. ' ' My next is * ' Huckle- 
berry Finn," but the family's next is "The Prince and the 
Pauper. " (Yes, you are right — I am a moralist in disguise ; 
it gets me into heaps of trouble when I go thrashing around 
in political questions.) 

I wish you every good fortune and happiness and I 
thank you so much for your letter. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Early in the year Clemens paid a visit to Twichell in Hartford, 
and after one of their regular arguments on theology and the 
moral accountability of the human race, arguments that had 
been going on between them for more than thirty years — 
Twichell lent his visitor Freedom of the Will, by Jonathan 
Edwards, to read on the way home. The next letter was the 
result. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

RlVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON. 

Feb. '02. 

Dear Joe, — "After compliments." 1 From Bridgeport 
to New York; thence to home; and continuously until near 
midnight I wallowed and reeked with Jonathan in his 
insane debauch; rose immediately refreshed and fine at 
10 this morning, but with a strange and haunting sense of 
having been on a three day's* tear with a drunken lunatic. 
It is years since I have known these sensations. All 
through the book is the glare of a resplendent intellect 
gone mad — a marvelous spectacle. No, not all through 

1 Meaning "What a good time you gave me; what a happiness it 
was to be under your roof again; etc., etc." See opening sentence 
of all translations of letters passing between Lord Roberts and 
Indian princes and rulers. 

719 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the book— the drunk does not come on till the last third, 
where what I take to be Calvinism and its God begins to 
show up and shine red and hideous in the glow from the 
fires of hell, their only right and proper adornment. By 
God I was ashamed to be in such company. 

Jonathan seems to hold (as against the Arminian posi- 
tion) that the Man (or his Soul or his Will) never creates 
an impulse itself, but is moved to action by an impulse 
back of it. That's sound! 

Also, that of two or more things offered it, it infallibly 
chooses the one which for the moment is most pleasing 
to ITSELF. Perfectly correct! An immense admission 
for a man not otherwise sane. 

Up to that point he could have written chapters III 
and IV of my suppressed "Gospel." But there we seem 
to separate. He seems to concede the indisputable and 
unshakable dominion of Motive and Necessity (call them 
what he may, these are exterior forces and not under the 
man's authority, guidance or even suggestion) — then he 
suddenly flies the logic track and (to all seeming) makes 
the man and not these exterior forces responsible to God 
for the man's thoughts, words and acts. It is frank 
insanity. 

I think that when he concedes the autocratic dominion 
of Motive and Necessity he grants a third position o: 
mine — that a man's mind is a mere machine — an auto- 
matic machine — which is handled entirely from the outside. 
the man himself furnishing it absolutely nothing: not an 
ounce of its fuel, and not so much as a bare suggestion to 
that exterior engineer as to what the machine shall do, nor 
how it shall do it nor when. 

After that concession, it was time for him to get alarmed 
and shirk — for he was pointing straight for the only 
rational and possible next-station on that piece of road: 
the irresponsibility of man to God. 

And so he shirked. Shirked, and arrived at this hand- 
some result: 

Man is commanded to do so-and-so; 

720 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It has been ordained from the beginning of time that 
some men shan't and others can't. 

These are to be blamed: let them be damned. 

I enjoy the Colonel very much, and shall enjoy the rest 
of him with an obscene delight. 

Joe, the whole tribe shout love to you and yours! 

Mark. 

We have not heard of Joe Goodman since the trying days of 
'oo and '91, when he was seeking to promote the fortunes of the 
type-setting machine. Goodman, meantime, who had in turn 
been miner, printer, publisher, and farmer, had been devoting 
his energies and genius to something entirely new: he had been 
translating the prehistoric Mayan inscriptions of Yucatan, and 
with such success that his work was elaborately published by 
an association of British scientists. In due time a copy of this 
publication came to Clemens, who was full of admiration of the 
great achievement. 

To J. T. Goodman, in California: 

RlVERDALE-ON-THE-HUDSON, 

June 13, '02. 

Dear Joe, — I am lost in reverence and admiration! 
It is now twenty-four hours that I have been trying to 
cool down and contemplate with quiet blood this ex- 
traordinary spectacle of energy, industry, perseverance, 
pluck, analytical genius, penetration, this irruption of 
thunders and fiery splendors from a fair and flowery 
mountain that nobody had supposed was a sleeping 
volcano, but I seem to be as excited as ever. Yesterday 
I read as much as half of the book, not understanding a 
word but enchanted nevertheless — partly by the wonder 
of it all, the study, the erudition, the incredible labor, 
the modesty, the dignity, the majestic exclusiveness of 
the field and its lofty remoteness from things and con- 
tacts sordid and mean and earthy, and partly by the 
grace and beauty and limpidity of the book's unsurpass- 
able English. Science, always great and worshipful, goes 

721 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



often in hodden grey, but you have clothed her in gar- 
ments meet for her high degree. 

You think you get "poor pay" for your twenty years? 
No, oh no. You have lived in a paradise of the intellect 
whose lightest joys were beyond the reach of the longest 
purse in Christendom, you have had daily and nightly 
emancipation from the world's slaveries and gross interests, 
you have received a bigger wage than any man in the land, 
you have dreamed a splendid dream and had it come true, 
and to-day you could not afford to trade fortunes with 
anybody — not even with another scientist, for he must 
divide his spoil with his guild, whereas essentially the 
world you have discovered is your own and must remain so. 

It is all just magnificent, Joe ! And no one is prouder or 
gladder than Yours always Mark. 

At York Harbor, Maine, where they had taken a cottage 
for the summer— a pretty place, with Howells not far distant, 
at Kittery Point — Mrs. Clemens's health gave way. This was 
at a period when telegraphic communication was far from 
reliable. The old-time Western Union had fallen from grace; 
its "system" no longer justified the best significance of that 
word. The new day of reorganization was coming, and it was 
time for it. Mark Twain's letter concerning the service at York 
Harbor would hardly be warranted to-day, but those who remem- 
ber conditions of that earlier time will agree that it was justified 
then, and will appreciate its satire. 

To the President of The Western Union, in New York: 

"The Pines" 
York Harbor, Maine. 

Dear Sir, — I desire to make a complaint, and I bring 
it to you, the head of the company, because by experi- 
ence I know better than to carry it to a subordinate. 

I have been here a month and a half, and by testimony 
of friends, reinforced by personal experience I now feel 
qualified to claim as an established fact that the tele- 
graphic service here is the worst in the world except that 
Boston. 

722 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



These services are actually slower than was the New 
York and Hartford service in the days when I last com- 
plained to you — which was fifteen or eighteen years ago, 
when telegraphic time and train time between the men- 
tioned points was exactly the same, to- wit, three hours 
and a half. 

Six days ago— it was that raw day which provoked so 
much comment— my daughter was on her way up from 
New York, and at noon she telegraphed me from New 
Haven asking that I meet her with a cloak at Portsmouth. 
Her telegram reached me four hours and a quarter later — 
just 15 minutes too late for me to catch my train and 
meet her. 

I judge that the telegram traveled about 200 miles. It 
is the best telegraphic work I have seen since I have been 
here, and I am mentioning it in this place not as a com- 
plaint but as a compliment. I think a compliment ought 
always to precede a complaint, where one is possible, 
because it softens resentment and insures for the com- 
plaint a courteous and gentle reception. 

Still, there is a detail or two connected with this matter 
which ought perhaps to be mentioned. And now, having 
smoothed the way with the compliment, I will venture 
them. The head corpse in the York Harbor office sent 
me that telegram altho (1) he knew it would reach me too 
late to be of any value; (2) also, that he was going to send 
it to me by his boy; (3) that the boy would not take the 
trolley and come the 2 miles in 1 2 minutes, but would walk; 

(4) that he would be two hours and a quarter on the road; 

(5) and that he would collect 25 cents for transportation, 
for a telegram which the h. c. knew to be worthless before 
he started it. From these data I infer that the Western 
Union owes me 7s cents; that is to say, the amount paid 
for combined wire and land transudation — a recoup 
provided for in the printed paragraph which heads the 
telegraph-blank. 

By these humane and Christian stages we now arrive 
at the complaint proper. We have had a grave case of 

723 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

illness in the family, and a relative was coming some six 
hundred miles to help in the sick-room during the con- 
valescing period. It was an anxious time, of course, and I 
wrote and asked to be notified as to the hour of the ex- 
pected arrival of this relative in Boston or in York Harbor. 
Being afraid of the telegraph — which I think ought not 
to be used in times of hurry and emergency — I asked that 
the desired message be brought to me by some swift 
method of transportation. By the milkman, if he was 
coming this way. But there are always people who think 
they know more than you do, especially young people; 
so of course the young fellow in charge of this lady used 
the telegraph. And at Boston, of all places! Except 
York Harbor. 

The result was as usual; let me employ a statelier and 
exacter term, and say, historical. 

The dispatch was handed to the h. c. of the Boston 
office at 9 this morning. It said, "Shall bring A. S. to 
you eleven forty-five this morning." The distance trav- 
eled by the dispatch is forty or fifty miles, I suppose, as 
the train-time is five minutes short of two hours, and the 
trains are so slow that they can't give a W. U. telegram 
two hours and twenty minutes start and overtake it. 

As I have said, the dispatch was handed in at Boston at 
9. The expected visitors left Boston at 9.40, and reached 
my house at 12 noon, beating the telegram 2 solid hours, 
and 5 minutes over. 

The boy brought the telegram. It was bald-headed 
with age, but still legible. The boy was prostrate with 
travel and exposure, but still alive, and I went out to 
condole with him and get his last wishes and send for the 
ambulance. He was waiting to collect transportation 
before turning his passing spirit to less serious affairs. 
I found him strangely intelligent, considering his condi- 
tion and where he is getting his training. I asked him 
at what hour the telegram was handed to the h. c. in 
Boston. He answered brightly, that he didn't know. 

I examined the blank, and sure enough the wary Boston 

724 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



h. c. had thoughtfully concealed that statistic. I asked 
him at what hour it had started from Boston. He an- 
swered up as brightly as ever, and said he didn't know. 

I examined the blank, and sure enough the Boston h. c. 
had left that statistic out in the cold, too. In fact it 
turned out to be an official concealment — no blank was 
provided for its exposure. And none required by the law, 
I suppose. "It is a good one-sided idea," I remarked; 
44 They can take your money and ship your telegram next 
year if they want to — you've no redress. The law ought 
to extend the privilege to all of us." 

The boy looked upon me coldly. 

I asked him when the telegram reached York Harbor. 
He pointed to some figures following the signature at the 
bottom of the blank — "12.14." I said it was now 1.45 
and asked — 

44 Do you mean that it reached your morgue an hour 
and a half ago?" 
He nodded assent. 

44 It was at that time half an hour too late to be of any 
use to me, if I wanted to go and meet my people— which 
was the case — for by the wording of the message you can 
see that they were to arrive at the station at 1 1.45. Why 
did your h. c. send me this useless message? Can't he 
read? Is he dead?" 

44 It's the rules." 

44 No, that does not account for it. Would he have 
sent it if it had been three years old, I in the meantime 
deceased, and he aware of it?" 

The boy didn't know. 

44 Because, you know, a rule which required him to 
forward to the cemetery to-day a dispatch due three 
years ago, would be as good a rule as one which should 
require him to forward a telegram to me to-day which he 
knew had lost all its value an hour or two before he started 
it. The construction of such a rule would discredit an 
idiot; in fact an idiot — I mean a common ordinary 
Christian idiot, you understand — would be ashamed of 

72S 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



it, and for the sake of his reputation wouldn't make it. 
What do you think?" 

He replied with much natural brilliancy that he wasn't 
paid for thinking. 

This gave me a better opinion of the commercial 
intelligence pervading his morgue than I had had before; 
it also softened my feelings toward him, and also my 
tone, which had hitherto been tinged with bitterness. 

"Let bygones be bygones," I said, gently, "we are all 
erring creatures, and mainly idiots, but God made us so 
and it is dangerous to criticise." Sincerely 

S. L. Clemens. 

One day there arrived from Europe a caller with a letter of 
introduction from Elizabeth, Queen of Rumania, better known 
as Carmen Sylva. The visitor was Madam Hartwig, formerly 
an American girl, returning now, because of reduced fortunes, 
to find profitable employment in her own land. Her husband, 
a man of high principle, had declined to take part in an "affair 
of honor," as recognized by the Continental code; hence his 
ruin. Elizabeth of Rumania was one of the most loved and 
respected of European queens and an author of distinction. 
Mark Twain had known her in Vienna. Her letter to him and 
his own letter to the public (perhaps a second one, for its date is 
two years later) follow herewith. 

From Carmen Sylva to Mark Twain: 

Bucajrest, May o, 1902. 

Honored Master, — If I venture to address you on 
behalf of a poor lady, who is stranded in Bucarest I hope 
not to be too disagreeable. 

Mrs. Hartwig left America at the age of fourteen in 
order to learn to sing which she has done thoroughly. 
Her husband had quite a brilliant situation here till he 
refused to partake dans une affaire onereuse, so it seems. 
They haven't a penny and each of them must try to find 
a living. She is very nice and pleasant and her school is 
so good that she most certainly can give excellent singing 
lessons. 

726 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I beg your pardon for being a bore to one I so deeply 
love and admire, to whom I owe days and days of forget- 
ful ness of self and troubles and the intensest of all joys: 
Heroworship! People don't always realize what a happi- 
ness that is! God bless you for every beautiful thought 
you poured into my tired heart and for every smile on a 



Nov. i6 t '04. 

To Whom It May Concern, — I desire to recommend 
Madame Hartwig to my friends and the public as a 



lived for fifteen years at the court of Roumania, and she 
brought with her to America an autograph letter in which 
her Majesty the Queen of Roumania cordially certified 
her to me as being an accomplished and gifted singer and 
teacher of singing, and expressed a warm hope that her 
professional venture among us would meet with success; 
through absence in Europe I have had no opportunity to 
test the validity of the Queen's judgment in the matter, 
but that judgment is the utterance of an entirely com- 
petent authority—the best that occupies a throne, and 
as good as any that sits elsewhere, as the musical world 
well knows— and therefore back it without hesitation, and 
endorse it with confidence. 

I will explain that the reason her Majesty tried to do 
her friend a friendly office through me instead of through 
some one else was, not that I was particularly the right or 
best person for the office, but because I was not a stranger. 
It is true that I am a stranger to some of the monarchs— 
mainly through their neglect of their opportunities— but 
such is not the case in the present instance. The latter 
fact is a high compliment to me, and perhaps I ought to 
conceal it. Some people would. 



weary way! 



Carmen Sylva. 



Front Mark Twain to the Public: 



teacher of singing and as a 



-t-vocalist. She has 



Mark Twain. 



(S. L. Clemens) 



727 




MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Mrs. Clemens 's improvement was scarcely perceptible. It 
was not until October that they were able to remove her to 
Riverdale, and then only in a specially arranged invalid-car. 
At the end of the long journey she was carried to her room and 
did not leave it again for many months. 

To Rev. y. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Riverdale, N. Y., Oct. ji, % o2. 

Dear Joe, — It is ten days since Susy [Twichell] wrote 
that you were laid up with a sprained shoulder, since 
which time we have had no news about it. I hope that 
no news is good news, according to the proverb; still, 
authoritative confirmation of it will be gladly received in 
this family, if some of you will furnish it. Moreover, I 
should like to know how and where it happened. In the 
pulpit, as like as not, otherwise you would not be taking 
so much pains to conceal it. This is not a malicious sug- 
gestion, and not a personally-invented one: you told me 
yourself, once, that you threw artificial power and im- 
pressiveness into places in your sermons where needed, 
by "banging the bible" — (your own words.) You have 
reached a time of life when it is not wise to take these 
risks. You would better jump around. We all have to 
change our methods as the infirmities of age creep upon 
us. Jumping around will be impressive now, whereas 
before you were gray it would have excited remark. 

Poor Livy drags along drearily. It must be hard 
times for that turbulent spirit. It will be a long time 
before she is on her feet again. It is a most pathetic 
case. I wish I could transfer it to myself. Between rip- 
ping and raging and smoking and reading, I could get a 
good deal of a holiday out of it. 

Clara runs the house smoothly and capably. She is 
discharging a trial-cook to-day and hiring another. 

A power of love to you all ! Mark. 

Such was the state of Mrs. Clemens 's health that visitors were 
excluded from the sick room, and even Clemens himself was 

728 

V 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



allowed to sec her no more than a few moments at a time. These 
brief, precious visits were the chief interests of his long days. 
Occasionally he was allowed to send her a few lines, reporting his 
occupations, and these she was sometimes permitted to answer. 
Only one of his notes has been preserved, written after a day, 
now rare, of literary effort. Its signature, the letter Y, stands 
for "Youth," always her name for him. 

To Mrs. Cleittens: 

Dear Heart, — I've done another full day's work, and 
finished before 4. I have been reading and dozing since — 
and would have had a real sleep a few minutes ago but 
for an incursion to bring me a couple of unimportant 
letters. I've stuck to the bed all day and am getting back 
my lost ground. Next time I will be strictly careful and 
make my visit very short — just a kiss and a rush. Thank 
you for your dear, dear note, you who are my own and 
only sweetheart. 

Sleep well ! 

Y. 



XLII 

LETTERS OP 1903. TO VARIOUS PERSONS. HARD DAYS AT 
RIVERDALE. LAST SUMMER AT ELMIRA. 
THE RETURN TO ITALY 

THE reader may perhaps recall that H. H. Rogers, some five 
or six years earlier, had taken charge of the fortunes of Helen 
Keller, making it possible for her to complete her education. 
Helen had now written her first book — a wonderful book — Tkt 
Story of My Life, and it had been successfully published. For a 
later generation it may be proper to explain that the Miss SuHi- 
van, later Mrs. Macy, mentioned in the letter which follows, 
was the noble woman who had devoted her life to the enlighten- 
ment of this blind, dumb girl — had made it possible for her to 
speak and understand, and, indeed, to see with the eyes of 
luminous imagination. 

The case of plagiarism mentioned in this letter is not now 
remembered, and does not matter, but it furnished a text for 
Mark Twain, whose remarks on the subject in general are 
eminently worth while. 

To Helen Keller, in Wrentham, Mass.: 

RlVERDALE-ON-THB-Hl-DSON, 

St. Patrick's Day, 'oj. 
Dear Helen,— I must steal half a moment from my 
work to say how glad I am to have your book, and how 
highly I value it, both for its own sake and as a remem- 
brancer of an affectionate friendship which has subsisted 
between us for nine years without a break, and without 
a single act of violence that I can call to mind. I suppose 
there is nothing like it in heaven; and not likely to be. 
until we get there and show off. I often think of it with 

730 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

longing, and how they'll say, "There they come — sit 
down in front!" I am practicing with a tin halo. You 
do the same. I was at Henry Rogers's last night, and of 
course we talked of you. He is not at all well; — you will 
not like to hear that; but like you and me, he is just as 
lovely as ever. 

I am charmed with your book — enchanted. You are a 
wonderful creature, the most wonderful in the world — 
you and your other half together — Miss Sullivan, I mean, 
for it took the pair of you to make a complete and per- 
fect whole. How she stands out in her letters! her bril- 
liancy, penetration, originality, wisdom, character, and 
the fine literary competencies of her pen — they are all 
there. 

Oh, dear me, how unspeakably funny and owlishly 
idiotic and grotesque was that "plagiarism" farce! As 
if there was much of anything in any human utterance, 
oral or written, except plagiarism! The kernal, the soul — 
let us go further and say the substance, the bulk, the 
actual and valuable material of all human utterances — 
is plagiarism. For substantially all ideas are second-hand, 
consciously and unconsciously drawn from a million out- 
side sources, and daily used by the garnerer with a pride 
and satisfaction born of the superstition that he originated 
them; whereas there is not a rag of originality about 
them anywhere except the little discoloration they get 
from his mental and moral calibre and his temperament, 
and which is revealed in characteristics of phrasing. 
When a great orator makes a great speech you are listening 
to ten centuries and ten thousand men — but we call it 
his speech, and really some exceedingly small portion of it 
is his. But not enough to signify. It is merely a Water- 
loo. It is Wellington's battle, in some degree, and we call 
it his; but there are others that contributed. It takes a 
thousand men to invent a telegraph, or a steam engine, or 
a phonograph, or a photograph, or a telephone or any 
other important thing — and the last man gets the credit 
and we forget the others. He added his little mite — that 

731 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

is all he did. These object lessons should teach us that 
ninety-nine parts of all things that proceed from the 
intellect are plagiarisms, pure and simple; and the lesson 
ought to make us modest. But nothing can do that. 

Then why don't we unwittingly reproduce the phrasing 
of a story, as well as the story itself ? It can hardly happen 
— to the extent of fifty words except in the case of a child: 
its memory-tablet is not lumbered with impressions, and 
the actual language can have graving-room there, and pre- 
serve the language a year or two, but a grown person's 
memory-tablet is a palimpsest, with hardly a bare space 
upon which to engrave a phrase. It must be a very rare 
thing that a whole page gets so sharply printed upon a 
man's mind, by a single reading, that it will stay long 
enough to turn up some time or other and be mistaken by 
him for his own. No doubt we are constantly littering 
our literature with disconnected sentences borrowed fr o m 
books at some un remembered time and now imagined to 
be our own, but that is about the most we can do. In 
1866 I read Dr. Holmes's poems, in the Sandwich Islands. 
A year and a half later I stole his dictation, without 
knowing it, and used it to dedicate my "Innocents 
Abroad" with. Then years afterwards I was talking 
with Dr. Holmes about it. He was not an ignorant ass — 
no, not he: he was not a collection of decayed human 
turnips, like your "Plagiarism Court;" and so when I 
said, "I know now where I stole it, but whom did you 
steal it from," he said, "I don't remember; I only know 
I stole it from somebody, because I have never originated 
anything altogether myself, nor met anybody who had." 

To think of those solemn donkeys breaking a little 
child's heart with their ignorant rubbish about plagia- 
rism ! I couldn't sleep for blaspheming about it last night. 
Why, their whole lives, their whole histories, all their 
learning, all their thoughts, all their opinions were 00c 
solid ruck of plagiarism, and they didn't know it and 
never suspected it. A gang of dull and hoary pirates 
piously setting themselves the task of disdplining and 

732 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



purifying a kitten that they think they've caught filching 
a chop! Oh, dam — 

But you finish it, dear, I am running short of vocabulary 
today. Ever lovingly your friend, 

Mark. 

(Edited and modified by Clara Clemens, deputy to her 
mother, who for more than 7 months has been ill in bed 
and unable to exercise her official function.) 

The burden of the Clemens household had fallen almost 
entirely upon Clara Clemens. In addition to supervising its 
customary affairs, she also shouldered the responsibility of an 
unusual combination of misfortunes, for besides the critical 
condition of her mother, her sister, Jean Clemens, was down 
with pneumonia, no word of which must come to Mrs. Clemens. 
Certainly it was a difficult position. In some account of it, 
which he set down later, Clemens wrote: "It was fortunate 
for us all that Clara's reputation for truthfulness was so well 
established in her mother's mind. It was our daily protection 
from disaster. The mother never doubted Clara's word. Clara 
could tell her large improbabilities without exciting any sus- 
picion, whereas if I tried to market even a small and simple one 
the case would have been different. I was never able to get a 
reputation like Clara's." 

The accumulation of physical ailments in the Clemens home 
had somewhat modified Mark Twain's notion of medical prac- 
tice. He was no longer radical ; he had become eclectic. It is a 
good deal of a concession that he makes to Twichell, after those 
earlier letters from Sweden, in which osteopathy had been 
heralded as the anodyne for all human ills. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Dear Joe,— Livy does really make a little progress 
these past 3 or 4 days, progress which is visible to even 
the untrained eye. The physicians are doing good work 
with her, but my notion is, that no art of healing is the 
best for all ills. I should distribute the ailments around : 
surgery cases to the surgeons; lupus to the actinic-ray 

11.— 19 733 



A k 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



specialist ; nervous prostration to the Christian Scientist ; 
most ills to the allopath and the homeopath; (in my own 
particular case) rheumatism, gout and bronchial attacks 
to the osteopathist. 

Mr. Rogers was to sail southward this morning — and 
here is this weather! I am sorry. I think it's a question 
if he gets away tomorrow. YsEver w 



It was through J. Y. M. MacAlister, to whom the next letter 
is written, that Mark Twain had become associated with the 
Plasmon Company, which explains the reference to "shares.** 
He had seen much of MacAlister during the winter at Ted worth 
Square, and had grown fond of him. It is a characteristic letter, 
and one of interesting fact. 

To J. Y. M. MacAlister, in London: 

k i vi k dale, New York. 

Dear MacAlister,— Yours arrived last night, and 
God knows I was glad to get it, for I was afraid I had 
blundered into an offence in some way and forfeited your 
friendship — a kind of blunder I have made so many times 
in my life that I am always standing in a waiting and 
morbid dread of its occurrence. 

Three days ago I was in condition — during one horribly 
long night — to sympathetically roast with you in your 
"hell of troubles." During that night I was back again 
where I was in the black days when I was buried under a 
mountain of debt. I called the daughters to me in private 
council and paralysed them with the announcement, "Our 
outgo has increased in the past 8 months until our expenses 
are now 125 per cent, greater than our income." 

It was a mistake. When I came down in the morning 
a gray and aged wreck, and went over the figures again. 
I found that in some unaccountable way (unaccountable 
to a business man but not to me) I had multiplied the totals 
by 2. By God I dropped 75 years on the floor where I 
stood. 

734 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Do you know it affected me as one is affected when he 
wakes out of a hideous dream and finds that it was only a 
dream. It was a great comfort and satisfaction to me to 
call the daughters to a private meeting of the Board again 
and say, "You need not worry any more; our outgo is 
only a third more than our income; in a few months your 
mother will be out of her bed and on her feet again — then 
we shall drop back to normal and be all right." 

Certainly there is a blistering and awful reality about a 
well-arranged unreality. It is quite within the possibilities 
that two or three nights like that night of mine could drive 
a man to suicide. He would refuse to examine the figures ; 
they would revolt him so, and he could go to his death 
unaware that there was nothing serious about them. I 
cannot get that night out of my head, it was so vivid, so 
real, so ghastly. In any other year of these 33 the relief 
would have been simple: go where you can cut your cloth 
to fit your income. You can't do that when your wife 
can't be moved, even from one room to the next. 

Clara spells the trained nurse afternoons; I am allowed 
to see Mrs. Clemens 20 minutes twice a day and write her 
two letters a day provided I put no news in them. No 
other person ever sees her except the physician and now 
and then a nerve-specialist from New York. She saw 
there was something the matter that morning, but she 
got no facts out of me. But that is nothing — she hasn't 
had anything but lies for 8 months. A fact would give her 
a relapse. 

The doctor and a specialist met in conspiracy five days 
ago, and in their belief she will by and by come out of 
this as good as new, substantially. They ordered her to 
Italy for next winter— which seems to indicate that by 
autumn she will be able to undertake the voyage. So 
Clara is writing a Florence friend to take a look round 
among the villas for us in the regions near that city. It 
seems early to do this, but Joan Bergheim thought it 
would be wise. 

He and his wife lunched with us here yesterday. They 

735 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



have been abroad in Havana 4 months, and they sailed 
for England this morning. 

I am enclosing an order for half of my (your) Founders 
shares. You are not to refuse them this time, though you 
have done it twice before. They are yours, not mine, and 
for your family's sake if not your own you cannot in these 
cloudy days renounce this property which is so clearly 
yours and theirs. You have been generous long enough, 
be just, now — to yourself. Mr. Rogers is off yachting for 
5 or 6 weeks — I'll get them when he returns. 

The head of the house joins me in warmest greetings 
and remembrances to you and Mrs. MacAlister. 

Ever yours, 

Mark. 

May 8. Great Scott! I never mailed this letter! I 
addressed it, put "Registered" on it — then left it lytn^ 
unsealed on the arm of my chair, and rushed up to my 
bed quaking with a chill. I've never been out of the bed 
since — oh, bronchitis, rheumatism, two sets of teeth ach- 
ing, land, I've had a dandy time for 4 weeks. And to-day 
— great guns, one of the very worst ! . . . 

I'm devilish sorry, and I do apologise — for although I 
am not as slow as you are about answering letters, as a 
rule, I see where I'm standing this time. 

Two weeks ago Jean was taken down again — this time 
with measles, and I haven't been able to go to her and she 
hasn't been able to come to me. 

But Mrs. Clemens is making nice progress, and can 
stand alone a moment or two at a time. 

Now I'll post this. u Mark. 

The two letters that follow, though written only a few days 
apart, were separated in their arrival by a period of seven years. 
The second letter was, in some way, mislaid and not mailed, 
and it was not until after the writer of it was dead that it was 
found and forwarded. 

Mark Twain could never get up much enthusiasm far the 
writings of Scott. His praise of Quentin Durward is about the 

736 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



only approval he ever accorded to the works of the great 

To Brander Matthews, in New York: 

New York City, May 4, *oj. 

Dear Brander, — I haven't been out of my bed for 
four weeks, but — well, I have been reading, a good deal, 
and it occurs to me to ask you to sit down, some time or 
other when you have 8 or 9 months to spare, and jot 
rne down a certain few literary particulars for my help 
and elevation. Your time need not be thrown away, for 
at your further leisure you can make Columbian lectures 
out of the results and do your students a good turn. 

1. Are there in Sir Walter's novels passages done in 
good English — English which is neither slovenly or in- 
volved? 

2. Are there passages whose English is not poor and 
thin and commonplace, but is of a quality above that? 

3. Are there passages which burn with real fire — not 
punk, fox-fire, make believe? 

4. Has he heroes and heroines who are not cads and 
cadesses? 

5. Has he personages whose acts and talk correspond 
with their characters as described by him? 

6. Has he heroes and heroines whom the reader admires, 
admires, and knows why? 

7. Has he funny characters that are funny, and humor- 
ous passages that are humorous? 

8. Does he ever chain the reader's interest, and make 
him reluctant to lay the book down? 

9. Are there pages where he ceases from posing, ceases 
from admiring the placid flood and flow of his own dilu- 
tions, ceases from being artificial, and is for a time, long 
or short, recognizably sincere and in earnest? 

10. Did he know how to write English, and didn't do 
it because he didn't want to? 

11. Did he use the right word only when he couldn't 

737 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



think of another one, or did he run so much to wrong 
because he didn't know the right one when he saw it ? 
^ 12. Can you read him? and keep your respect for him' 
Of course a person could in his day — an era of sentimen- 
tality and sloppy romantics — but land ! can a body do it 
today? 

Brander, I lie here dying, slowly dying, under the blight 
of Sir Walter. I have read the first volume of Rob Roy, 
and as far as chapter XIX of Guy Mannering, and I can 
no longer hold my head up nor take my nourishment. 
Lord, it's all so juvenile! so artificial, so shoddy; and such 
wax figures and skeletons and spectres. Interest? Why, 
it is impossible to feel an interest in these bloodless shams, 
these milk-and-water humbugs. And oh, the poverty of 
the invention! Not poverty in inventing situations, but 
poverty in furnishing reasons for them. Sir Walter usually 
gives himself away when he arranges for a situation — 
elaborates, and elaborates, and elaborates, till if you live 
to get to it you don't believe in it when it happens. 

I can't find the rest of Rob Roy, I can't stand any more 
Mannering — I do not know just what to do, but I will 
reflect, and not quit this great study rashly. He was 
great, in his day, and to his proper audience ; and so was 
God in Jewish times, for that matter, but why should 
either of them rank high now? And do they? — honest, 
now, do they? Dam'd if I believe it. 

My, I wish I could see you and Leigh Hunt ! 

Sincerely Yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

* 

To Brander Matthews, in New York: 

Rive rd ale, May 8, *oj (Mailed June, igio). 
Dear Brander, — I'm still in bed, but the days have 
lost their dulness since I broke into Sir Walter and lost 
my temper. I finished Guy Mannering — that curious, 
curious book, with its mob of squalid shadows jabbering 
around a single flesh-and-blood being— Dinmont; a book 

738 

» 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



crazily put together out of the very refuse of the romance- 
artist's stage properties— finished it and took up Quentin 
Durward, and finished that. 

It was like leaving the dead to mingle with the living: 
it was like withdrawing from the infant class in the College 
of Journalism to sit under the lectures in English literature 
in Columbia University. 

I wonder who wrote Quentin Durward? 

Yrs ever Mark. 

In 1903, preparations were going on for a great world's fair, to 
be held in St. Louis, and among other features proposed was a 
World's Literary Convention, with a week to be set apart in 
honor of Mark Twain, and a special Mark Twain Day in it, on 
which the National Association would hold grand services in 
honor of the distinguished Missourian. A letter asking his 
consent to the plan brought the following reply. 

To T. F. Gatts, of Missouri: 

New Yoek, May jo, 1003. 

Dear Mr. Gatts,— It is indeed a high compliment 
which you offer me in naming an association after me and 
in proposing the setting apart of a Mark Twain day at the 
great St. Louis fair, but such compliments are not proper 
for the living; they are proper and safe for the dead only. 
I value the impulse which moves you to tender me these 
honors. I value it as highly as any one can, and am grate- 
ful for it, but I should stand in a sort of terror of the honors 
themselves. So long as we remain alive we are not safe 
from doing things which, however righteously and honor- 
ably intended, can wreck our repute and extinguish our 
friendships. 

I hope that no society will be named for me while I 
am still alive, for I might at some time or other do some- 
thing which would cause its members to regret having 
done me that honor. After I shall have joined the dead I 
shall follow the customs of those people and be guilty of 
no conduct that can wound any friend; but until that 

739 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



time shall come I shall be a doubtful quantity like the 
rest of our race. Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The National Mark Twain Association did not surrender 
easily. Mr. Gatts wrote a second letter full of urgent appeal. 
If Mark Twain was tempted, we get no hint of it in his answer. 

To T. F. Gaits, of Missouri: 

New York, June 8, iqoj. 
Dear Mr. Gatts, — While I am deeply touched by 
the desire of my friends of Hannibal to confer these gTeat 
honors upon me, I must still forbear to accept them. 
Spontaneous and unpremeditated honors, like those which 
came to me at Hannibal, Columbia, St. Louis and at the 
village stations all down the line, are beyond all price and 
are a treasure for life in the memory, for they are a free 
gift out of the heart and they come without solicitations; 
but I am a Missouriaruand so I shrink from distinctions 
which have to be arranged beforehand and with my 
privity, for I then become a party to my own exalting. 
I am humanly fond of honors that happen but chary of 
those that come by canvass and intention. With sincere 
thanks to you and your associates for this high compli- 
ment which you have been minded to offer me, I am, 

Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

We have seen in the letter to MacAlister that Mark Twain's 
wife had been ordered to Italy and plans were in progress for an 
establishment there. By the end of June Mrs. Clemens was 
able to leave Riverdale, and she made the journey to Quarry 
Farm, Elmira, where they would remain until October, the 
month planned for their sailing. The house in Hartford had been 
sold; and a house which, prior to Mrs. Clemens's breakdown 
they had bought near Tarrytown (expecting to settle permenenthr 
on the Hudson) had been let. They were going to Europe for 
another indefinite period. 

740 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



At Quarry Farm Mrs. Clemens continued to improve, and 
Clemens, once more able to work, occupied the study which 
Mrs. Crane had built for him thirty years before, and where 
Tom Sawyer and Buck Finn and the Wandering Prince had been 
called into being. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford, Conn.: 

Quarry Farm, Elmira, N. Y. f 

July 2i t 'oj. 

Dear Joe, — That love-letter delighted Livy beyond 
any like utterance received by her these thirty years and 
more. I was going to answer it for her right away, and 
said so; but she reserved the privilege to herself. I 
judge she is accumulating Hot Stuff— as George Ade 
would say. . . . 

Livy is coming along: eats well, sleeps some, is mostly 
very gay, not very often depressed; spends all day on 
the porch, sleeps there a part of the night, makes excur- 
sions in carriage and in wheel-chair; and, in the matter 
of superintending everything and everybody, has resumed 
business at the old stand. 

Did you ever go house-hunting 3,000 miles away? It 
costs three months of writing and telegraphing to pull 
off a success. We finished 3 or 4 days ago, and took the 
Villa Papiniano (dam the name, I have to look at it 2 
minutes after writing it, and then am always in doubt) 
for a year by cable. Three miles outside of Florence, 
under Fiesole — a darling location, and apparently a choice 
house, near Fiske. 

There's 7 in our gang. All women but me. It means 
trunks and things. But thanks be! To-day (this is 
private) comes a most handsome voluntary document 
with seals and escutcheons on it from the Italian Ambas- 
sador (who is a stranger to me) commanding the Customs 
people to keep their hands off the Clemens' s things. Now 
wasn't it lovely of him? And wasn't it lovely of me to 
let Livy take a pencil and edit my answer and knock a 
good third of it out? 

74i 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



And that's a nice ship — the Irene! new — swift — 13,000 
tons — rooms up in the sky, open to sun and air — and all 
that. I was desperately troubled — for Livy — about the 
down-cellar cells in the ancient "Lahn. ' 

The cubs are in Riverdale, yet; they come to us the 
first week in August. 

With lots and lots of love to you all, 

Mark. 

The arrangement for the Villa Papiniano was not completed, 
after all, and through a good friend, George Gregory Smith, 1 
resident of Florence, the Villa Quarto, an ancient home of royalty, 
on the hills west of Florence, was engaged. Smith wrote that 
was a very beautiful place with a south-eastern exposure, looking 
out toward Valombrosa and the Chianti Hills. It had extensive 
grounds and stables, and the annual rental for it all was two 
thousand dollars a year. It seemed an ideal place, in pros- 
pect, and there was great hope that Mrs. Clemens would 
find her health once more in the Italian climate which she 
loved. 

Perhaps at this point, when Mark Twain is once more leaving 
America, we may offer two letters from strangers to him — tetters 
of appreciation — such as he was constantly receiving from those 
among the thousands to whom he had given happiness. Tzt 
first is from Samuel Merwin, one day to become a popular 
novelist, then in the hour of his beginnings. 

To Mark Twain, from Samuel Merwin: 

Plainfikld, N. 

August 4, 1903. 

Dear Mr. Clemens, — For a good many years I have 
been struggling with the temptation to write you and 
thank you for the work you have done; and to-day I seen 
to be yielding. 

During the past two years I have been reading through 
a group of writers who seem to me to represent about the 
best we have — Sir Thomas Malory, Spenser, Shakespeare, 
Boswell, Carlyle, Le Sage. In thinking over one and then 
another, and then all of them together, it was plain to 

74* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



see why they were great men and writers: each brought 
to his time some new blood, new ideas, — turned a new 
current into the stream. I suppose there have always 
been the careful, painstaking writers, the men who are 
always taken so seriously by their fellow craftsmen. It 
seems to be the unconventional man who is so rare — I 
mean the honestly unconventional man, who has to express 
himself in his own big way because the conventional way 
isn't big enough, because ne needs room and freedom. 

We have a group of the more or less conventional men 
now — men of dignity and literary position. But in spite 
of their influence and of all the work they have done, there 
isn't one of them to whom one can give one's self up with- 
out reservation, not one whose ideas seem based on the 
deep foundation of all true philosophy, — except Mark 
Twain. 

I hope this letter is not an impertinence. I have just 
been turning about, with my head full of Spenser and 
Shakespeare and " Gil Bias," looking for something in 
our own present day literature to which I could surrender 
myself as to those five gripping old writings. And nothing 
could I find until I took up "Life on the Mississippi," 
and " Huckleberry Finn," and, just now, the "Connecticut 
Yankee." It isn't the first time I have read any of these 
three, and it's because I know it won't be the last, because 
these books are the only ones written in my lifetime that 
claim my unreserved interest and admiration and, above 
all, my feelings, that I've felt I had to write this letter. 

I like to think that "Tom Sawyer" and "Huckleberry 
Finn" will be looked upon, fifty or a hundred years from 
now, as the picture of buoyant, dramatic, human American 
life. I feel, deep in my own heart, pretty sure that they 
will be. They won't be looked on then as the work of a 
"humorist" any more than we think of Shakespeare as a 
humorist now. I don't mean by this to set up a comparison 
between Mark Twain and Shakespeare: I don't feel com- 
petent to do it; and I'm not at all sure that it could be 
done until Mark Twain's work shall have its fair share of 

743 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



historical perspective. But Shakespeare was a humorist 
and so, thank Heaven! is Mark Twain. And Shake- 
speare plunged deep into the deep, sad things of life; and 
so, in a different way (but in a way that has more than 
once brought tears to my eyes) has Mark Twain. But 
after all, it isn't because of any resemblance for anything 
that was ever before written that Mark Twain's books 
strike in so deep: it's rather because they've brought 
something really new into our literature — new, yet old 
as Adam and Eve and the Apple. And this achievement, 
the achievement of putting something into literature that 
was not there before, is, I should think, the most that any 
writer can ever hope to do. It is the one mark of distinc- 
tion between the " lonesome" little group of big men and 
the vast herd of medium and small ones. Anyhow, this 
much I am sure of — to the young man who hopes, however 
feebly, to accomplish a little something, some day, as a 
writer, the one inspiring example of our time is Mark 
Twain. 

Very truly yours, 

Samuel Mbrwin. 

Mark Twain once said he could live a month on a good compli- 
ment, and from his reply, we may believe this one to belong in 
that class. 

To Samuel Merwin> in Plainfield, N. J.: 

Aug. 1 6, *oj. 

Dear Mr. Merwin, — What you have said has given 
me deep pleasure — indeed I think no words could be said 
that could give me more. 

Very sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The next "compliment" is from one who remains unknown, 
for she failed to sign her name in full. But it is a lovely letter, 
and loses nothing by the fact that the writer of it was willing to 
remain in obscurity. 

744 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAINS LETTERS 



To Mark Twain, from Margaret M — : 

Portland, Oregon, 
Aug. 18, 1003. 

My dear, dear Mark Twain,— May a little girl write 
and tell you how dearly she loves and admires your writ- 
ings? Well, I do and I want to tell you your ownself. 
Don't think me too impertinent for indeed I don't mean 
to be that ! I have read everything of yours that I could 
get and parts that touch me I have read over and over 
again. They seem such dear friends to me, so like real 
live human beings talking and laughing, working and 
suffering too! One cannot but feel that it is your own 
life and experience that you have painted. So do not 
wonder that you seem a dear friend to me who has never 
even seen you. I often think of you as such in my own 
thoughts. I wonder if you will laugh when I tell you I 
have made a hero of you? For when people seem very 
sordid and mean and stupid (and it seems as if everybody 
was) then the thought will come like a little crumb of 
comfort "well, Mark Twain isn't anyway." And it does 
really brighten me up. 

You see I have gotten an idea that you are a great, 
bright spirit of kindness and tenderness. One who can 
twist everybody's — even your own — faults and absurdities 
into hearty laughs. Even the person mocked must laugh ! 
Oh, Dear ! How often you have made me laugh ! And yet 
as often you have struck something infinite away down 
deep in my heart so that I want to cry while half laughing ! 

So this all means that I want to thank you and to tell 
you. "God always love Mark Twain!" is often my wish. 
I dearly love to read books, and I never tire of reading 
yours; they always have a charm for me. Good-bye, I 
am afraid I have not expressed what I feel. But at least 
I have tried. Sincerely yours. 

Margaret M. — 

Clemens and family left Elmira October the 5 th for New York 
City. They remained at the Hotel Grosvenor until their sailing 

745 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



date, October 24th. A few days earlier, Mr. Frank Doubleday 
sent a volume of Kipling's poems and de Blowitz's Memoirs for 
entertainment on the ship. Mark Twain's acknowledgment 
follows. 

To F. N. Doubleday, in New York: 

The Grosvenor, 
October 12, '03. 

Dear Doubleday, — The books came — ever so many 
thanks. I have been reading "The Bell Buoy" and 
"The Old Men" over and over again — my custom with 
Kipling's work — and saving up the rest for other leisurely 
and luxurious meals. A bell-buoy is a deeply impressive 
fellow-being. In these many recent trips up and down 
the Sound in the Kanawha 1 he has talked to me nightly, 
sometimes in his pathetic and melancholy way, sometimes 
with his strenuous and urgent note, and I got his meaning 
— now I have his words! No one but Kipling could do 
this strong and vivid thing. Some day I hope to hear the 
poem chanted or sung — with the bell-buoy breaking in, 
out of the distance. 

"The Old Men," delicious, isn't it? And so comically 
true. I haven't arrived there yet, but I suppose I am on 
the way. . . . 

Yours ever, 

Mark. 

P. S. Your letter has arrived. It makes me proud 
and glad — what Kipling says. I hope Fate will fetch 
him to Florence while we are there. I would rather see 
him than any other man. 

We've let the Tarrytown house for a year. Man, you 
would never have believed a person could let a house in 
these times. That one's for sale, the Hartford one is sold. 
When we buy again may we — may I — be damned. 

I've clipped into Blowitz and find him quaintly and 

1 Mr. Rogers's yacht. 
746 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

curiously interesting. I think he tells the straight truth, 
too. I knew him a little, 23 years ago. 

The appreciative word which Kipling had sent Double- 
day was: '* I love to think of the great and God-like Clemens. 
He is the biggest man you have on your side of the water by 
a damn sight, and don't you forget it. Cervantes was a 
relation of his." 



Digitized by Google 



XLIII 

LETTERS OP IOO4. TO VARIOUS PERSONS. LIFE IN VILLA 
QUARTO. DEATH OF MRS. CLEMENS, THE 
RETURN TO AMERICA 

MRS, CLEMENS stood the voyage to Italy very well and, 
in due time, the family were installed in the Villa Reale di 
Quarto, the picturesque old Palace of Cosimo, a spacious, lux- 
urious place, even if not entirely cheerful or always comfortable 
during the changeable Tuscan winter. Congratulated in a letter 
from MacAlister in being in the midst of Florentine sunshine, 
he answered : " Florentine sunshine? Bless you, there isn't any. 
We have heavy fogs every morning, and rain all day. This 
house is not merely large, it is vast — therefore I think it must 
always lack the home feeling." 

Neither was their landlady, the American wife of an Italian 
count, all that could be desired. From a letter to Twichell, 
however, we learn that Mark Twain's work was progressing 
well. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Villa di Quarto, 
Florence, Jan. 7, '04. 

Dear Joe, — . . . I have had a handsome success, in 
one way, here. I left New York under a sort of half 
promise to furnish to the Harper magazines 30,000 words 
this year. Magazining is difficult work because every 
third page represents 2 pages that you have put in the 
fire; (because you are nearly sure to start wrong twice) 
and so when you have finished an article and are willing 
to let it go to print it represents only 10 cents a word 
instead of 30. 

But this time I had the curious (and unprecedented) 

748 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

luck to start right in each case. I turned out 37,000 
words in 25 working days; and the reason I think I 
started right every time is, that not only have I approved 
and accepted the several articles, but the court of last 
resort (Livy) has done the same. 

On many of the between-days I did some work, but 
only of an idle and not necessarily necessary sort, since 
it will not see print until I am dead. I shall continue this 
(an hour per day) but the rest of the year I expect to put 
in on a couple of long books (half-completed ones.) No 
more magazine-work hanging over my head. 

This secluded and silent solitude this clean, soft air and 
this enchanting view of Florence, the great valley and the 
snow-mountains that frame it are the right conditions for 
work. They are a persistent inspiration. To-day is very 
lovely; when the afternoon arrives there will be a new 
picture every hour till dark, and each of them divine — or 
progressing from divine to diviner and divinest. On this 
(second) floor Clara's room commands the finest; she 
keeps a window ten feet high wide open all the time and 
frames it in. I go in from time to time, every day and 
trade sass for a look. The central detail is a distant and 
stately snow-hump that rises above and behind black- 
forested hills, and its sloping vast buttresses, velvety and 
sun-polished with purple shadows between, make the 
sort of picture we knew that time we walked in Switzer- 
land in the days of our youth. 

I wish I could show your letter to Livy — but she must 
wait a week or so for it. I think I told you she had a 
prostrating week of tonsilitis a month ago; she has 
remained very feeble ever since, and confined to the bed 
of course, but we allow ourselves to believe she will regain 
the lost ground in another month. Her physician is 
Professor Grocco — she could not have a better. And 
she has a very good trained nurse. 

Love to all of you from all of us. And to all of our 
dear Hartford friends. 

Mark. 

il-h) 749 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



P. 5. j days later. 

Livy is as remarkable as ever. The day I wrote you — 
that night, I mean — she had a bitter attack of gout or 
rheumatism occupying the whole left arm from shoulder 
to fingers, accompanied by fever. The pains racked her 
50 or 60 hours; they have departed, now — and already 
she is planning a trip to Egypt next fall, and a winter's 
sojourn there! This is life in her yet. 

You will be surprised that I was willing to do so much 
magazine-writing — a thing I have always been chary 
about — but I had good reasons. Our expenses have been 
so prodigious for a year and a half, and are still so prodig- 
ious, that Livy was worrying altogether too much about 
them, and doing a very dangerous amount of lying awake 
on their account. It was necessary to stop that, and it is 
now stopped. 

Yes, she is remarkable, Joe. Her rheumatic attack set 
me to cursing and swearing, without limit as to time or 
energy, but it merely concentrated her patience and her 
unconquerable fortitude. It is the difference between us. 
I can't count the different kinds of ailments which have 
assaulted her in this fiendish year and a half — and I forgive 
none of them — but here she comes up again as bright and 
fresh and enterprising as ever, and goes to planning about 
Egypt, with a hope and a confidence which are to me 
amazing. 

Clara is calling for me — we have to go into town and 
pay calls. Mark. 

In Florence, that winter, Clemens began dictating to his 
secretary some autobiographical chapters. This was the work 
which was "not to see print until I am dead." He found it 1 
pleasant, lazy occupation and wrote his delight in it to HoweHs 
in a letter which seems not to have survived. In his reply. 
Ho wells wrote: "You do stir me mightily with the hope of 
dictating and I will try it when I get the chance. But there is 
the tempermental difference. You are dramatic and uncon- 
scious; you count the thing more than yourself; I am cursed 
with consciousness to the core, and can't say myself out; I am 

7SO 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

always saying myself in, and setting myself above all that I say, 
as of more worth. Lately I have felt as if I were rotting with 
egotism. I don't admire myself; I am sick of myself; but I 
can't think of anything else. Here I am at it now, when I ought 
to be rejoicing with you at the blessing you have found. . . . 
I'd like, immensely, to read your autobiography. You always 
rather bewildered me by your veracity, and I fancy you may tell 
the truth about yourself. But all of it? The black truth which 
we all know of ourselves in our hearts, or only the whity-brown 
truth of the pericardium, or the nice, whitened truth of the shirt- 
front? Even you won't tell the black heart 's-truth. The man who 
could do it would be famed to the last day the sun shone upon." 

We gather from Mark Twain's answer that he was not deceiv- 
ing himself in the matter of his confessions. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Villa di Quarto, Florence, 

March 14, '04. 

Dear Howells, — Yes, I set up the safeguards, in the 
first day's dictating;— taking this position: that an auto- 
biography is the truest of all books; for while it inevitably 
consists mainly of extinctions of the truth, shirkings of the 
truth, partial revealments of the truth, with hardly an 
instance of plain straight truth, the remorseless truth is 
there, between the lines, where the author is raking dust 
upon it, the result being that the reader knows the author 
in spite of his wily diligences. 

The surnmer in England ! you can't ask better luck than 
that. Then you will run over to Florence; we shall all 
be hungry to see you-all. We are hunting for another 
villa, (this one is plenty large enough but has no room in 
it) but even if we find it I am afraid it will be months 
before we can move Mrs. Clemens. Of course it will. 
But it comforts us to let on that we think otherwise, and 
these pretensions help to keep hope alive in her. 

Good-bye, with love, Amen. 

Yours ever Mark. 

News came of the death of Henry M. Stanley, one of Mark 
Twain's oldest friends. Clemens once said that he had met 

751 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Stanley in St. Louis where he (Clemens) had delivered a lecture 
which Stanley had reported. In the following letter he fixes 
the date of their meeting as early in 1867, which would be 
immediately after Mark Twain's return from California, and 
just prior to the Quaker City excursion— a fact which is inter- 
esting only because it places the two men together when each 
was at the very teginning of a great career. 

To Lady Stanley, in England: 

Villa di Quarto, Firenze, May 11, '04. 

Dear Lady Stanley, — I have lost a dear and honored 
friend — how fast they fall about me now, in my age ! The 
world has lost a tried and proved hero. And you — what 
have you lost? It is beyond estimate — we who know 
you, and what he was to you, know that. How far be 
stretches across my life! I knew him when his work was 
all before him — five years before the great day that he 
wrote his name far-away up on the blue of the sky for 
the world to see and applaud and remember; I have 
known him as friend and intimate ever since. It is 37 
years. I have known no other friend and intimate so 
long, except John Hay — a friendship which dates from 
the same year and the same half of it, the first half of 
1867. I grieve with you and with your family, dear Lady 
Stanley, it is all I can do; but that I do out of my heart. 
It would be we, instead of I, if Mrs. Clemens knew, bu: 
in all these 20 months that she has lain a prisoner in her 
bed we have hidden from her all things that could sadden 
her. Many a friend is gone whom she still asks about and 
still thinks is living. 

In deepest sympathy I beg the privilege of signing 
myself Your friend, 

S. L. Clemens. 

To Rev. J. H. Tunchell in Hartford: 

Villa di Quarto, May it, '04. 
Dear Joe, — Yours has this moment arrived — just as 
I was finishing a note to poor Lady Stanley. I believe the 

75* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



last country-house visit we paid in England was to Stan- 
ley's. Lord, how my friends and acquaintances fall about 
me now, in my gray-headed days ! Vereschagin, Momm- 
sen, Dvorak, Lenbach, Jokai — all so recently, and now 
Stanley. I had known Stanley 37 years. Goodness, who 
is it I haven't known! As a rule the necrologies find me 
personally interested — when they treat of old stagers. 
Generally when a man dies who is worth cabling, it happens 
that I have run across him somewhere, some time or other. 

Oh, say! Down by the Laurentian Library there's a 
marble image that has been sitting on its pedestal some 
450 years, if my dates are right — Cosimo I. I've seen the 
back of it many a time, but not the front; but yesterday 
I twisted my head around after we had driven by, and the 
profane exclamation burst from my mouth before I could 
think: M there's Chauncey Depew!" 

I mean to get a photo of it — and use it if it confirms 
yesterday's conviction. That's a very nice word from the 
Catholic Magazine and I am glad you sent it. I mean to 
show it to my priest — we are very fond of him. He is a 
sterling man, and is also learnedly scientific. He invented 
the thing which records the seismatic disturbances, for 
the peoples of the earth. And he's an astronomer and has 
an observatory of his own. 

Ah, many's the cry I have, over reflecting that maybe 
we could have had Young Harmony for Livy, and didn't 
have wit enough to think of it. 

Speaking of Livy reminds me that your inquiry arrives 
at a good time (unberufen) It has been weeks (I don't 
know how many!) since we could have said a hopeful 
word, but this morning Katy came the minute the day- 
nurse came on watch and said words of a strange and long- 
forgotten sound: "Mr. Clemens, Mrs. Clemens is really 
and truly better! — anybody can see it; she sees it herself; 
and last night at 9 o'clock she said it." 

There — it is heart- warming, it is splendid, it is sublime; 
let us enjoy it, let us make the most of it to-day— and bet 
not a farthing on to-morrow. The tomorrows have noth- 

753 



Uigitiz 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ing for us. Too many times they have breathed the word 
of promise to our ear and broken it to our hope. We take 
no to-morrow's word any more. 

You've done a wonder, Joe: you've written a letter 
that can be sent in to Livy — that doesn't often happen, 
when either a friend or a stranger writes. You did whirl 
in a P. S. that wouldn't do, but you wrote it on a margin 
of a page in such a way that I was able to clip off the 
margin clear across both pages, and now Livy won't per- 
ceive that the sheet isn't the same size it used to was. It 
was about Aid rich's son, and I came near forgetting to 
remove it. It should have been written on a loose strip 
and enclosed. That son died on the 5th of March and 
Aldrich wrote me on the night before that his minutes 
were numbered. On the 18th Livy asked after that 
patient, and I was prepared, and able to give her a grateful 
surprise by telling her "the Aldriches are no longer uneasy 
about him." 

I do wish I could have been present and heard Charley 
Clark. When he can't light up a dark place nobody can, 
With lots of love to you all. Mark. 

Mrs. Clemens had her bad days and her good days — days 
when there seemed no ray of light, and others that seemed 
almost to promise recovery. The foregoing letter to TwicbeH, 
and the one which follows, to Richard Watson Gilder, renect 
the hope and fear that daily and hourly alternated at MEa 
Quarto. 

To Richard Watson Gilder, in New York: 

Villa di Quarto, Florence, 

May J2, 'a*. 

Dear Gilder,— A friend of ours (the Baroness de 
Nolda) was here this afternoon and wanted a note of 
introduction to the Century, for she has something to 
sell to you in case you'll want to make her an offer after 
seeing a sample of the goods. I said "With pleasure: get 
the goods ready, send the same to me, I will have Jean 
type-write them, then I will mail them to the Century 

754 



Digitized by Google 




RIC HARD WATSON GI1.DKR AIM H T I903 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and to-night I will write the note to Mr. Gilder and start 
it along. Also write me a letter embodying what you have 
been saying to me about the goods and your proposed 
plan of arranging and explaining them, and I will forward 
that to Gilder too." 

As to the Baroness. She is a German; 30 years old; 
was married at 17; is very pretty — indeed I might say 
very pretty; has a lot of sons (5) running up from seven 
to 12 years old. Her husband is a Russian. They live 
half the time in Russia and the other half in Florence, and 
supply population alternately to the one country and 
then to the other. Of course it is a family that speaks 
languages. This occurs at their table — I know it by 
experience. It is Babel come again. The other day, 
when no guests were present to keep order, the tribes 
were all talking at once, and 6 languages were being 
traded in; at last the littlest boy lost his temper and 
screamed out at the top of his voice, with angry sobs: 
"Mais, vraiment, io non capisco gar nichts." 

The Baroness is a little afraid of her English, therefore 
she will write her remarks in French — I said there's a 
plenty of translators in New York. Examine her samples 
and drop her a line — 

For two entire days, now, we have not been anxious 
about Mrs. Clemens (unberufen). After 20 months of 
bed-ridden solitude and bodily misery she all of a sudden 
ceases to be a pallid shrunken shadow, and looks bright 
and young and pretty. She remains what she always 
was, the most wonderful creature of fortitude, patience, 
endurance and recuperative power that ever was. But 
ah, dear, it won't last; this fiendish malady will play new 
treacheries upon her, and I shall go back to my prayers 
again — unutterable from any pulpit! 

With love to you and yours, S. L. C. 

May 13 10 A.M. I have just paid one of my pair of per- 
mitted 2 minutes visits per day to the sick room. And 
found what I have learned to expect— retrogression, and 

755 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



that pathetic something in the eye which betrays the 
secret of a waning hope. 

The year of the World's Fair had come, and an invitation from 
Gov. Francis, of Missouri, came to Mark Twain in Florence, 
personally inviting him to attend the great celebration and carry 
off first prize. We may believe that Clemens felt little in the 
spirit of humor, but to such an invitation he must send a cheerful, 
even if disappointing, answer. 

To Gov. Francis, of Missouri: 

Villa di Quarto, Firenze, 

May 26, 1004. 

Dear Governor Francis, — It has been a dear wish of 
mine to exhibit myself at the Great Fair and get a prize, 
but circumstances beyond my control have interfered, 
and I must remain in Florence. Although I have never 
taken prizes anywhere else I used to take them at school 
in Missouri half a century ago, and I ought to be able to 
repeat, now, if I could have a chance. I used to get the 
medal for good spelling, every week, and I could have had 
the medal for good conduct if there hadn't been so much 
curruption in Missouri in those days; still, I got it several 
times by trading medals and giving boot. I am willing 
to give boot now, if — however, those days are forever 
gone by in Missouri, and perhaps it is better so. Nothing 
ever stops the way it was in this changeable world . 
Although I cannot be at the Fair, I am going to be repre- 
sented there anyway, by a portrait, by Professor Gelli. 
You will find it excellent. Good judges here say it is 
better than the original. They say it has all the merits 
of the original and keeps still, besides. It sounds like 
flattery, but it is just true. 

I suppose you will get a prize, because you have created 
the most prodigious and in all ways most wonderful Fair 
the planet has ever seen. Very well, you have indeed 
earned it: and with it the gratitude of the State and the 
nation. Sincerely yours, 

Mark Twain. 

756 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It was only a few days after the foregoing was written that 
death entered Villa Quarto— unexpectedly at last— for with the 
first June days Mrs. Clemens had seemed really to improve. It 
was on Sunday, June 5th, that the end came. Clemens, with 
his daughter Jean, had returned from a long drive, during 
which they had visited a Villa with the thought of purchase. 
On their return they were told that their patient had been 
better that afternoon than for three months. Yet it was only 
a few hours later that she left them, so suddenly and quietly 
that even those near her did not at first realize that she was 
gone. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York. 

Villa di Quarto, Florence, 

June 6, '04. 

Dear Howells, — Last night at 9.20 I entered Mrs. 
Clemens's room to say the usual goodnight — and she 
was dead — tho' no one knew it. She had been cheerfully 
talking, a moment before. She was sitting up in bed — 
she had not lain down for months — and Katie and the 
nurse were supporting her. They supposed she had 
fainted, and they were holding the oxygen pipe to her 
mouth, expecting to revive her. I bent over her and 
looked in her face, and I think I spoke — I was surprised 
and troubled that she did not notice me. Then we under- 
stood, and our hearts broke. How poor we are to-day! 

But how thankful I am that her persecutions are 
ended. I would not call her back if I could. 

To-day, treasured in her worn old Testament, I found 
a dear and gentle letter from you, dated Far Rockaway, 
Sept. 13, 1896, about our poor Susy's death. I am tired 
and old ; I wish I were with Livy . 

I send my love — and hers — to you all. 

S. L. C 

In a letter to Twichell he wrote: "How sweet she was in 
death ; how young, how beautiful, how like her dear, girlish self 
cf thirty years ago; not a gray hair showing." 

The family was now without plans for the future until they 
remembered the summer home of R. W. Gilder, at Tyringham, 

757 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Massachusetts, and the possibility of finding lodgment for 
themselves in that secluded corner of New England. Clemens 
wrote without delay, as follows: 

To R. W. Gilder, in New York: 

Villa di Quarto, Florence, 

June 7, '04. 

Dear Gilder Family,— I have been worrying and 
worrying to know what to do: at last I went to the girls 
with an idea: to ask the Gilders to get us shelter near 
their summer home. It was the first time they have not 
shaken their heads. So to-morrow I will cable to you and 
shall hope to be In time. 

An hour ago the best heart that ever beat for me and 
mine went silent out of this house, and I am as one who 
wanders and has lost his way. She who is gone was 
our head, she was our hands. We are now trying to make 
plans — we: we who have never made a plan before, nor 
ever needed to. If she could speak to us she would 
make it all simple and easy with a word, and our per- 
plexities would vanish away. If she had known she was 
near to death she would have told us where to go and what 
to do: but she was not suspecting, neither were we. (She 
had been chatting cheerfully a moment before, and in an 
instant she was gone from us and we did not know it. 
We were not alarmed, we did not know anything had 
happened. It was a blessed death— she passed away with- 
out knowing it.) She was all our riches and she is gone: 
she was our breath, she was our life and now we are 
nothing. 

We send you our love — and with it the love of you that 
was in her heart when she died. 

S. L. Clemens. 

Howells wrote his words of sympathy, adding : "The character 
which now remains a memory was one of the most perfect ever 
formed on the earth," and again, after having received Clemens s 
letter: "I cannot speak of your wife's having kept that letter 

758 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



of mine where she did. You know bow it must humiliate a man 
in his unworthiness to have anything of his so consecrated. She 
hallowed what she touched, far beyond priests." 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Villa di Quarto, '04. 

June 12, 6 p. m. 

Dear Howells, — We have to sit and hold our hands 
and wait — in the silence and solitude of this prodigious 
house; wait until June 25, then we go to Naples and 
sail in the Prince Oscar the 26th. There is a ship 12 days 
earlier (but we came in that one.) I see Clara twice a 
day— morning and evening — greeting— nothing more is 
allowed. She keeps her bed, and says nothing. She has 
not cried yet. I wish she could cry. It would break 
Livy's heart to see Clara. We excuse ourselves from 
all the friends that call — though of course only intimates 
come. Intimates — but they are not the old old friends, 
the friends of the old, old times when we laughed. 

Shall we ever laugh again? If I could only see a dog 
that I knew in the old times! and could put my arms 
around his neck and tell him all, everything, and ease my 
heart. 

Think — in 3 hours it will be a week! — and soon a 
month ; and by and by a year. How fast our dead fly from 
us. 

She loved you so, and was always as pleased as a child 
with any notice you took of her. 

Soon your wife will be with you, oh fortunate man! 
And John, whom mine was so fond of. The sight of him 
was such a delight to her. Lord, the old friends, how dear 
they are, S. L. C. 

To Rev. J. H. TwicheU, in Hartford: 

Villa di Quarto, Florence, 

June 18, '04. 

Dear Joe, — It is 13 days. I am bewildered and must 
remain so for a time longer. It was so sudden, so un- 

759 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



expected. Imagine a man worth a hundred millions who 
finds himself suddenly penniless and fifty million in debt 
in his old age. 

I was richer than any other person in the world, and 
now I am that pauper without peer. Some day I will tell 
you about it, not now. Mark. 

A tide of condolence flowed in from all parts of the world. It 
was impossible to answer all. Only a few who had been their 
closest friends received a written line, but the little printed 
acknowledgment which was returned was no mere formality . 
It was a heartfelt, personal word. 

They arrived in America in July, and were accompanied by 
Twichell to Elrnira, and on the 14th Mrs. Clemens was laid to 
rest by the side of Susy and little Langdon. R. W. Gilder had 
arranged for them to occupy, for the summer, a cottage on 
his place at Tyringham, in the Berkshire Hills. By Novem- 
ber they were at the Grosvenor, in New York, preparing to estab- 
lish themselves in a house which they had taken on the corner 
of Ninth Street and Fifth Avenue— Number 21. 

To F. N. Doubleday, in New York: 

Dear Doubleday, — I did not know you were going 
to England: I would have freighted you with such mes- 
sages of homage and affection to Kipling. And I would 
have pressed his hand, through you, for his sympathy 
with me in my crushing loss, as expressed by him in his 
letter to Gilder. You know my feeling for Kipling and 
that it antedates that expression. 

I was glad that the boys came here to invite me to 
the house-warming and I think they understood why a 
man in the shadow of a calamity like mine could not 
go. 

It has taken three months to repair and renovate 
our house — corner of 9th and 5th Avenue, but I shall be 
in it in 10 or 15 days hence. Much of the furniture went 
into it today (from Hartford). We have not seen it for 
13 years. Katy Leary, our old housekeeper, who has 
been in our service more than 24 years, cried when she 

760 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



told me about it to-day. She said "I had forgotten it was 
so beautiful, and it brought Mrs. Clemens right back to 
me — in that old time when she was so young and lovely." 

Jean and my secretary and the servants whom we 
brought from Italy because Mrs. Clemens liked them 
so well, are still keeping house in the Berkshire hills — and 
waiting. Clara (nervously wrecked by her mother's 
death) is in the hands of a specialist in 69th St., and I 
shall not be allowed to have any communication with 
her— even telephone — for a year. I am in this com- 
fortable little hotel, and still in bed— for I dasn't budge 
till I'm safe from my pet devil, bronchitis. 

Isn't it pathetic? One hour and ten minutes before 
Mrs. Clemens died I was saying to her 44 To-day, after 
five months search, I've found the villa that will con- 
tent you: to-morrow you will examine the plans and 
give it your consent and I will buy it." Her eyes danced 
with pleasure, for she longed for a home of her own. And 
there, on that morrow, she lay white and cold. And un- 
responsive to my reverent caresses— a new thing to me 
and a new thing to her; thai had not happened before 
in five and thirty years. 

I am coming to see you and Mrs. Doubleday by and 
bye. She loved and honored Mrs. Doubleday and her 
work. Always yours, Mark. 

It was a presidential year and the air was thick with politics. 
Mark Twain was no longer actively interested in the political 
situation; he was only disheartened by the hollowness and 
ore tense of office-seek ine. and the methods of office-seekers in 
general. Grieved that Twichell should still pin his faith to any 
party when all parties were so obviously venal and time-serving, 
he wrote in outspoken and rather somber protest. 

To Rev. J. H. TwicheU, in Hartford: 

The Grosvenor, Nov. 4, '04. 
Oh, dear! get out of that sewer— party politics— dear 
Joe. At least with your mouth. We had only two men 

761 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



who could make speeches for their parties and preserve 
their honor and their dignity. One of them is dead. Pos- 
sibly there were four. I am sorry for John Hay; sorry 
and ashamed. And yet I know he couldn't help it. He 
wears the collar, and he had to pay the penalty. Cer- 
tainly he had no more desire to stand up before a mob 
of confiding human incapables and debauch them than 
you had. Certainly he took no more real pleasure in 
distorting history, concealing facts, propagating immorali- 
ties, and appealing to the sordid side of human nature 
than did you; but he was his party's property, and he 
had to climb away down and do it. 

It is interesting, wonderfully interesting — the miracles 
which party-politics can do with a man's mental and 
moral make-up. Look at McKinley, Roosevelt, and 
yourself: in private life spotless in character; honorable, 
honest, just, humane, generous; scorning trickeries, 
treacheries, suppressions of the truth, mistranslations of 
the meanings of facts, the filching of credit earned by 
another, the condoning of crime, the glorifying of base 
acts: in public political life the reverse of all this. 

McKinley was a silverite — you concealed it. Roose- 
velt was a silverite — you concealed it. Parker was a 
silverite — you publish it. Along with a shudder and a 
warning : "He was unsafe then. Is he any safer now ?" 

Joe, even I could be guilty of such a thing as that — if I 
were in party-politics; I really believe it. 

Mr. Cleveland gave the country the gold standard; 
by implication you credit the matter to the Republican 
party. 

By implication you prove the whole annual pension- 
scoop, concealing the fact that the bulk of the money 
goes to people who in no way deserve it. You imply 
that all the batteners upon this bribery-fund are Republi- 
cans. An indiscreet confession, since about half of them 
must have been Democrats before they were bought. 

You as good as praise Order 78. It is true you do not 
shout, and you do not linger, you only whisper and 

762 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



skip — still, what little you do in the matter is compli- 
mentary to the crime. 

It means, if it means anything, that our outlying 
properties will all be given up by the Democrats, and our 
flag hauled down. All of them? Not only the properties 
stolen by Mr. McKinley and Mr. Roosevelt, but the 
properties honestly acquired? Joe, did you believe that 
hardy statement when you made it? Yet you made it, 
and there it stands in permanent print. Now what moral 
law would suffer if we should give up the stolen ones? 
But — 

"You know our standard-bearer. He will maintain all 
that we have gained" — by whatever process. Land, I 
believe you! 

By George, Joe, you are as handy at the game as if you 
had been in training for it all your life. Your campaign 
Address is built from the ground up upon the oldest and 
best models. There isn't a paragraph in it whose facts or 
morals will wash — not even a sentence, I believe. 

But you will soon be out of this. You didn't want to 
do it — that is sufficiently apparent, thanks be! — but you 
couldn't well get out of it. In a few days you will be out 
of it, and then you can fumigate yourself and take up 
your legitimate work again and resume your clean and 
wholesome private character once more and be happy — 
and useful. 

I know I ought to hand you some guff, now, as propitia- 
tion and apology for these reproaches, but on the whole 
I believe I won't. 

I have inquired, and find that Mitsikuri does not ar- 
rive here until to-morrow night. I shall watch out, and 
telephone again, for I greatly want to see him. 

Always Yours, 

Mark. 

P-S- Nov. 4. I wish I could learn to remember that 
it is unjust and dishonorable to put blame upon the 
human race for any of its acts. For it did not make it- 

763 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



self, it did not make its nature, it is merely a machine, 
it is moved wholly by outside influences, it has no hand 
in creating the outside influences nor in choosing which of 
them it will welcome or reject, its performance is wholly 
automatic, it has no more mastership nor authority over 
its mind than it has over its stomach, which receives 
material from the outside and does as it pleases with it, 
indifferent to it's proprietor's suggestions, even, le: 
alone his commands; wherefore, whatever the machine 
does — so called crimes and infamies included — is the 
personal act of its Maker, and He, solely, is responsible. 
I wish I could learn to pity the human race instead of 
censuring it and laughing at it ; and I could, if the outside 
influences of old habit were not so strong upon my ma- 
chine. It vexes me to catch myself praising the clean pri- 
vate citizen Roosevelt, and blaming the soiled President 
Roosevelt, when I know that neither praise nor blame is 
due to him for any thought or word or deed of his, he 
being merely a helpless and irresponsible coffee-mill 
ground by the hand of God. 

Through a misunderstanding, Clemens, something more than 
a year earlier, had severed his connection with the Players* Club, 
of which he had been one of the charter members. Now. upoc 
his return to New York, a number of his friends joined in &z 
invitation to him to return. It was not exactly a letter they 
sent, but a bit of an old Scotch song — 

"To Mark Twain 



The Clansmen. 
Will ye no come back again, 
Will ye no come back again? 
Better lo'ed ye canna be. 
Will ye no come back again?" 

Those who signed it were David Monroe, of the North A mrrucn 
Review; Robert Reid, the painter, and about thirty others of the 
Round Table Group, so called because its members were accus- 
tomed to lunching at a large round table in a bay window of the 

764 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Player dining-room. Mark Twain's reply was prompt and 
heartfelt. He wrote: 

To Robt. Reid and the Others: 

Well-Beloved, — Surely those lovely verses went to 
Prince Charley's heart, if he had one, and certainly they 
have gone to mine. I shall be glad and proud to come 
back again after such a moving and beautiful compli- 
ment as this from comrades whom I have loved so long. 
I hope you can poll the necessary vote; I know you will 
try, at any rate. It will be many months before I can 
foregather with you, for this black border is not per- 
functory, not a convention; it symbolizes the loss of one 
whose memory is the only thing I worship. 

It is not necessary for me to thank you — and words could 
not deliver what I feel, anyway. I will put the contents 
of your envelope in the small casket where I keep the things 
which have become sacred to me. 

S. L. C 

A year later, Mark Twain did "come back again," as an 
honorary life member, and was given a dinner of welcome by 
those who had signed the lines urging his return. 

11—21 



Digitized 



XLIV 

LETTERS OP IOO5. TO TWICHELL, MR. DUKBKA AND 
OTHERS. POLITICS AND HUMANITY. A SUMMER 
AT DUBLIN. MARK TWAIN AT 70 

IN 1884 Mark Twain had abandoned the Republican Party 
to vote for Cleveland. He believed the party had become 
corrupt, and to his last day it was hard for him to see anything 
good in Republican policies or performance. He was a personal 
friend of Thedore Roosevelt's but, as we have seen in a former 
letter, Roosevelt the politician rarely found favor in his eyes. 
With or without justification, most of the President's political 
acts invited his caustic sarcasm and unsparing condemnation. 
Another letter to Twichell of this time affords a fair example. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell, in Hartford: 

Feb. 16, '05. 

Dear Joe, — I knew I had in me somewhere a definite 
feeling about the President if I could only find the words 
to define it with. Here they are, to a hair — from Leonard 
Jerome: "For twenty years I have loved Roosevelt the 
man and hated Roosevelt the statesman and politician/ ' 

It's mighty good. Every time, in 25 years, that I have 
met Roosevelt the man, a wave of welcome has streaked 
through me with the hand-grip; but whenever (as a rule) 
I meet Roosevelt the statesman and politician, I find him 
destitute of morals and not respectworthy. It is plain 
that where his political self and his party self are con- 
cerned he has nothing resembling a conscience; that 
under those inspirations he is naively indifferent to the 
restraints of duty and even unaware of them; ready to 
kick the Constitution into the back yard whenever it 

766 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



gets in the way; and whenever he smells a vote, not only 
willing but eager to buy it, give extravagant rates for 
it and pay the bill — not out of his own pocket or the 
party's, but out of the nation's, by cold pillage. As 
per Order 78 and the appropriation of the Indian trust 
funds. 

But Roosevelt is excusable — I recognize it and (ought 
to) concede it. We are all insane, each in his own way, 
and with insanity goes irresponsibility. Theodore the man 
is sane ; in fairness we ought to keep in mind that Theodore, 
as statesman and politician, is insane and irresponsible. 

Do not throw these enlightenments aside, but study 
them, let them raise you to higher planes and make you 
better. You taught me in my callow days, let me pay 
back the debt now in my old age out of a thesaurus 
with wisdom smelted from the golden ores of experience. 

Ever yours for sweetness and light Mark. 

The next letter to Twichell takes up politics and humanity in 
general, in a manner complimentary to neither. Mark Twain 
was never really a pessimist, but he had pessimistic intervals, 
such as come to most of us in life's later years, and at such times 
he let himself go without stint concerning "the damned human 
race," as he called it, usually with a manifest sense of indigna- 
tion that he should be a member of it. In much of his later 
writing— A Mysterious Stranger for example — he said his say 
with but small restraint, and certainly in his purely intellectual 
moments he was likely to be a pessimist of the most extreme type, 
capably damning the race and the inventor of it. Yet, at heart, 
no man loved his kind more genuinely, or with deeper compassion, 
than Mark Twain, perhaps for its very weaknesses. It was only 
that he had intervals— frequent intervals, and rather long ones — 
when he did not admire it, and was still more doubtful as to the 
ways of providence. 

To Rev. J. H. Twichell in Hartford: 

March 14, '05. 

Dear Joe— I have a Puddn'head maxim: 
"When a man is a pessimist before 48 he knows 

767 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



too much; if he is an optimist after it, he knows too 
little." 

It is with contentment, therefore, that I reflect that I 
am better and wiser than you. Joe, you seem to be deal- 
ing in "bulks," now; the "bulk" of the farmers and U. S. 
Senators are "honest." As regards purchase and sale 
with money? Who doubts it? Is that the only measure 
of honesty? Aren't there a dozen kinds of honesty which 
can't be measured by the money-standard? Treason is 
treason — and there's more than one form of it; the 
money-form is but one of them. When a person is dis- 
loyal to any confessed duty, he is plainly and simply 
dishonest, and knows it; knows it, and is privately 
troubled about it and not proud of himself. Judged by 
this standard — and who will challenge the validity of 
it? — there isn't an honest man in Connecticut, nor in 
the Senate, nor anywhere else. I do not even except my- 
self, this time. 

Am I finding fault with you and the rest of the populace ? 
No — I assure you I am not. For I know the human 
race's limitations, and this makes it my duty— my pleasant 
duty — to be fair to it. Each person in it is honest in one 
or several ways, but no member of it is honest in all the 
ways required by — by what ? By his own standard. Out- 
side of that, as I look at it, there is no obligation upon him. 

Am I honest? I give you my word of honor (private) I 
am not. For seven years I have suppressed a book which 
my conscience tells me I ought to publish. I hold it a 
duty to publish it. There are other difficult duties which 
I am equal to, but I am not equal to that one. Yes, even 
I am dishonest. Not in many ways, but in some. Forty- 
one, I think it is. We are certainly all honest in one or 
several ways — every man in the world — though I have 
reason to think I am the only one whose black-list runs 
so light. Sometimes I feel lonely enough in this lofty 
solitude. 

Yes, oh, yes, I am not overlooking the "steady progress 
from age to age of the coming of the kingdom of God 

768 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and righteousness." "From age to age "—yes, it describes 
that giddy gait. I (and the rocks) will not live to see it 
arrive, but that is all right — it will arrive, it surely will. 
But you ought not to be always ironically apologizing for 
the Deity. If that thing is going to arrive, it is inferable 
that He wants it to arrive; and so it is not quite kind of 
you, and it hurts me, to see you flinging sarcasms at the 
gait of it. And yet it would not be fair in me not to 
admit that the sarcasms are deserved. When the Deity 
wants a thing, and after working at it for " ages and ages " 
can't show even a shade of progress toward its accom- 
plishment, we — well, we don't laugh, but it is only be- 
cause we dasn't. The source of "righteousness" — is in 
the heart? Yes. And engineered and directed by the 
brain? Yes. Well, history and tradition testify that the 
heart is just about what it was in the beginning; it has 
undergone no shade of change. Its good and evil im- 
pulses and their consequences are the same to-day that 
they were in Old Bible times, in Egyptian times, in 
Greek times, in Middle Age times, in Twentieth Century 
times. There has been no change. 

Meantime, the brain has undergone no change. It is 
what it always was. There are a few good brains and a 
multitude of poor ones. It was so in Old Bible times and 
in all other times — Greek, Roman, Middle Ages and 
Twentieth Century. Among the savages— all the savages 
— the average brain is as competent as the average brain 
here or elsewhere. I will prove it to you, some time, if 
you like. And there are great brains among them, too. 
I will prove that also, if you like. 

Well, the 19th century made progress — the first prog- 
ress after "ages and ages" — colossal progress. In what? 
Materialities. Prodigious acquisitions were made in 
things which add to the comfort of many and make 
life harder for as many more. But the addition to right- 
eousness? Is that discoverable? I think not. The 
materialities were not invented in the interest of right- 
eousness; that there is more righteousness in the world 

769 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



because of them than there was before, is hardly demon- 
strable, I think. In Europe and America there is a 
vast change (due to them) in ideals — do you admire It? 
All Europe and all America are feverishly scrambling for 
money. Money is the supreme ideal — all others take 
tenth place with the great bulk of the nations named. 
Money-lust has- always existed, but not in the history 
of the world was it ever a craze, a madness, until your 
time and mine. This lust has rotted these nations; it 
has made them hard, sordid, ungentle, dishonest, oppres- 
sive. 

Did England rise against the infamy of the Boer war' 
No — rose in favor of it. Did America rise against the 
infamy of the Phillipine war? No — rose in favor of it. 
Did Russia rise against the infamy of the present war? 
No — sat still and said nothing. Has the Kingdom of God 
advanced in Russia since the beginning of time? 

Or in Europe and America, considering the vast back- 
ward step of the money-lust? Or anywhere else? If there 
has been any progress toward righteousness since the 
early days of Creation— which, in my ineradicable 
honesty, I am obliged to doubt — I think we must confine 
it to ten per cent of the populations of Christendom, 
(but leaving Russia, Spain and South America entirely 
out.) This gives us 320,000,000 to draw the ten per cent 
from. That is to say, 32,000,000 have advanced toward 
righteousness and the Kingdom of God since the * 4 ages and 
ages" have been flying along, the Deity sitting up there 
admiring. Well, you see it leaves 1,200,000,000 out of the 
race. They stand just where they have always stood; 
there has been no change. 

N . B . No charge for these informations. Do come down 
soon, Joe. With love, 

Mark. 

St. Clair McKelway, of The Brooklyn Eagle, narrowly escaped 
injuries in a railway accident, and received the following. Clem- 
ens and McKelway were old friends. 

770 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To St. Clair McKelway, in Brooklyn: 

21 Fifth Ave. Sunday Morning. 

April jo, ioo$. 

Dear McKelway— Your innumerable friends are 
grateful, most grateful. 

As I understand the telegrams, the engineer of your 
train had never seen a locomotive before. Very well, then, 
I am once more glad that there is an Ever-watchful Provi- 
dence to foresee possible results and send Ogdens and 
Mclntyres along to save our friends. 

The Government's Official report, showing that our 
railways killed twelve hundred persons last year and 
injured sixty thousand convinces me that under present 
conditions one Providence is not enough to properly and 
efficiently take care of our railroad business. But it is 
characteristically American — always trying to get along 
short-handed and save wages. 

I am helping your family congratulate themselves, and 
am your friend as always. g L Clemens. 



Clemens did not spend any more summers at Quarry Farm. 
All its associations were beautiful and tender, but they could 
only sadden him. The life there had been as of another world, 
sunlit, idyllic, now forever vanished. For the summer of 1905 
he leased the Copley Green house at Dublin, New Hampshire, 
where there was a Boston colony of writing and artistic folk, 
including many of his long-time friends. Among them was 
Colonel Thomas Wentworth Higginson, who wrote a hearty 
letter of welcome when he heard the news. Clemens replied in 
Kind. 

To Col. Thomas Wentworth Higginson, in Boston: 

21 Fifth Ave. Sunday, March 26, 1005. 

Dear Col. Higginson,— I early learned that you would 
be my neighbor in the Summer and I rejoiced, recognizing 
in you and your family a large asset. I hope for frequent 
intercourse between the two households. I shall have my 

77* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



youngest daughter with me. The other one will go from 
the rest-cure in this city to the rest-cure in Norfolk Conn, 
and we shall not see her before autumn. We have no: 
seen her since the middle of October. 

Jean (the youngest daughter) went to Dublin and saw 
the house and came back charmed with it. I know the 
Thayers of old — manifestly there is no lack of attractions 
up there. Mrs. Thayer and I were shipmates in a wild 
excursion perilously near 40 years ago. 

You say you "send with this " the story. Then it should 
be here but it isn't, when I send a thing with another 
thing, the other thing goes but the thing doesn't, I find it 
later — still on the premises. Will you look it up now and 
send it? 

Aldrich was here half an hour ago, like a breeze from 
over the fields, with the fragrance still upon his spirit 
I am tired of waiting for that man to get old. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. C. 

Mark Twain was in his seventieth year, old neither in mind 
nor body, but willing to take life more quietly, to refrain from 
travel and gay events. A sort of pioneers' reunion was to be 
held on the Pacific Coast, and a letter from Robert Fulton, of 
Reno, Nevada, invited Clemens to attend. He did not go, but 
he sent a letter that we may believe was the next best thing to 
those who heard it read. 

To Robert Fulton, in Reno, Nevada: 

In the Mountains. 

May 24, 1 oo$. 

Dear Mr. Fulton, — I remember, as if it were yester- 
day, that when I disembarked from the overland stage 
in front of the Ormsby in Carson City in August, iS6i, I 
was not expecting to be asked to come again. I was 
tired, discouraged, white with alkali dust, and did not 
know anybody; and if you had said then, "Cheer up. 
desolate stranger, don't be down-hearted — pass on, and 

77* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



come again in 1905," you cannot think how grateful I 
would have been and how gladly I would have closed the 
contract. Although I was not expecting to be invited, I 
was watching out for it, and was hurt and disappointed 
when you started to ask me and changed it to, " How soon 
are you going away?" 

But you have made it all right, now, the wound is 
closed. And so I thank you sincerely for the invitation; 
and with you, all Reno, and if I were a few years younger 
I would accept it, and promptly. I would go. I would 
let somebody else do the oration, but, as for me, I would 
talk — just talk. I would renew my youth; and talk — 
and talk — and talk — and have the time of my life! I 
would march the unforgotten and unforgettable antiques 
by, and name their names, and give them reverent Hail- 
and-farewell as they passed: Goodman, McCarthy, 
Gillis, Curry, Baldwin, Winters, Howard, Nye, Stewart; 
Neely Johnson, Hal Clayton, North, Root, — and my 
brother, upon whom be peace! — and then the despera- 
does, who made life a joy and the "Slaughter-house" a 
precious possession : Sam Brown, Farmer Pete, Bill May- 
field, Six-fingered Jake, Jack Williams and the rest of the 
crimson discipleship — and so on and so on. Believe me, I 
would start a resurrection it would do you more good 
to look at than the next one will, if you go on the way you 
are doing now. 

Those were the days! — those old ones. They will come 
no more. Youth will come no more. They were so full 
to the brim with the wine of life; there have been no 
others like them. It chokes me up to think of them. 
Would you like me to come out there and cry? It would 
not beseem my white head. 

Good-bye. I drink to you all. Have a good time— and 
take an old man's blessing. 

Mark Twain. 

A few days later he was writing to H. H. Bancroft, of San 
Francisco, who had invited him for a visit in event of his coming 

773 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



to the Coast. Henry James had just been there for a week and 
it was hoped that Howells would soon follow. 

To H. H. Bancroft, in San Francisco: 

Up in New Hampshire, 

May 27, 1905. 

Dear Mr. Bancroft, — I thank you sincerely for the 
tempting hospitalities which you offer me, but I have to 
deny myself, for my wandering days are over, and it s 
my desire and purpose to sit by the fire the rest of my 
remnant of life and indulge myself with the pleasure and 
repose of work — work uninterrupted and uiunarred by 
duties or excursions. 

A man who like me, is going to strike 70 on the 30th ot 
next November has no business to be flitting around the 
way Howells does — that shameless old fictitious butter- 
fly. (But if he comes, don't tell him I said it. for it 
would hurt him and I wouldn't brush a flake of powder 
from his wing for anything. I only say it in envy of his 
indestructible youth, anyway. , Howells will be 88 in 
October.) With thanks again, 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. C. 

Clemens found that the air of the New Hampshire hills agreed 
with him and stimulated him to work. He began an entirely 
new version of The Mysterious Stranger, of which he already had 
a bulky and nearly finished manuscript, written in Vienna. He 
wrote several hundred pages of an extravaganza entitled, Tkret 
Thousand Years Among the Microbes, and then, having got hi* 
superabundant vitality reduced (it was likely to expend itself 
in these weird mental exploits), he settled down one day and 
wrote that really tender and beautiful idyl, Eve's Diary, which 
he had begun, or at least planned, the previous summer at 
Tyringham. In a letter to Mr. Frederick A. Duneka, general 
manager of Harper & Brothers, he tells something of the manner 
of the story; also his revised opinion of Adam's Diary, written 
in '93, and originally published as a souvenier of Niagara 
Falls. 

774 



igitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To Frederick A. Duneka, in New York: 

Dublin, July i6 % '05. 

Dear Mr. Duneka, — I wrote Eve's Diary, she using 
Adam's Diary as her (unwitting and unscious) text, of 
course, since to use any other text would have been an 
imbecility — then I took Adam's Diary and read it. It 
turned my stomach. It was not literature; yet it had 
been literature once — before I sold it to be degraded to an 
advertisement of the Buffalo Fair. I was going to write 
and ask you to melt the plates and put it out of print. 

But this morning I examined it without temper, and 
saw that if I abolished the advertisement it would be 
literature again. 

So I have done it. I have struck out 700 words and 
inserted 5 MS pages of new matter (650 words), and now 
Adam's Diary is dam good — sixty times as good as it ever 
was before. 

I believe it is as good as Eve's Diary now — no, it's not 
quite that good, I guess, but it is good enough to go in 
the same cover with Eve's. I'm sure of that. 

I hate to have the old Adam go out any more — don't put 
it on the presses again , let's put the new one in place of it ; 
and next Xmas, let us bind Adam and Eve in one cover. 
They score points against each other — so, if not bound 
together, some of the points would not be perceived. . . . 
P. S. Please send another Adam's Diary, so that I can 
make 2 revised copies. Eve's Diary is Eve's love-Story, 
but we will not name it that. Yrs ever, Mark. 

The peace -making at Portsmouth between Japan and Russia 
was not satisfactory to Mark Twain, who had fondly hoped 
there would be no peace until, as he said, "Russian liberty was 
safe. One more battle would have abolished the waiting chains 
of millions upon millions of unborn Russians and I wish it could 
have been fought." He set down an expression of his feelings 
for the Associated Press, and it invited many letters. Charles 
Francis Adams wrote, "It attracted my attention because it so 
exactly expresses the views I have myself all along entertained." 

775 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

Clemens was invited by Colonel George Harvey to dine with 
the Russian emissaries, Baron Rosen and Sergius Witte. He 
declined, but his telegram so pleased Witte that he asked per 
mission to publish it, and announced that he would show it to 
the Czar. 

Telegram. To Col. George Harvey, in New York: 

To Colonel Harvey, — I am still a cripple, otherwise 
I should be more than glad of this opportunity to meet the 
illustrious magicians who came here equipped with 
nothing but a pen, and with it have divided the honors of 
the war with the sword. It is fair to presume that in 
thirty centuries history will not get done admiring these 
men who attempted what the world regarded as im- 
possible and achieved it. Mark Twain. 

Witte would not have cared to show the Czar the telegram in 
its original form, which follows. 

Telegram (unsent). To Col. George Harvey, in New York: 

To Colonel Harvey, — I am still a cripple, otherwise I 
should be more than glad of this opportunity to meet 
those illustrious magicians who with the pen have an- 
nulled, obliterated, and abolished every high achievement 
of the Japanese sword and turned the tragedy of a tre- 
mendous war into a gay and blithesome comedy. If I 
may, let me in all respect and honor salute them as my 
fellow-humorists. I taking third olace. as becomes one 
who was not born to modesty, but by diligence and hard 
work is acquiring it. Mark. 

Nor still another unsent form, perhaps more characteristic 
than either of the foregoing. 

Telegram (unsent). To Col. George Harvey, in New York: 

Dear Colonel, — No, this is a love-feast; when you call 
a lodge of sorrow send for me. Mark. 

776 



1 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To Mrs. Crane, Quarry Farm: 

Dublin, Sept. 24, '05. 

Susy dear, I have had a lovely dream. Livy, dressed in 
black, was sitting up in my bed (here) at my right and 
looking as young and sweet as she used to do when she 
was in health. She said: "what is the name of your 
sweet sister?" I said, "Pamela." "Oh, yes, that is it, 
I thought it was — (naming a name which has escaped 
me) "Won't you write it down for me?" I reached 
eagerly for a pen and pad — laid my hands upon both — 
then said to myself, "It is only a dream," and turned 
back sorrowfully and there she was, still. The conviction 
flamed through me that our lamented disaster was a 
dream, and this a reality. I said, "How blessed it is, 
how blessed it is, it was all a dream, only a dream!" 
She only smiled and did not ask what dream I meant, 
which surprised me. She leaned her head against mine 
and I kept saying, "I was perfectly sure it was a dream, 
I never would have believed it wasn't." 

I think she said several things, but if so they are gone 
from my memory. I woke and did not know I had been 
dreaming. She was gone. I wondered how she could 
go without my knowing it, but I did not spend any 
thought upon that, I was too busy thinking of how vivid 
and real was the dream that we had ost her and how 
unspeakably blessed it was to find that it was not true and 
that she was still ours and with us. 

S. L. C 

« 

One day that summer Mark Twain received a letter from the 
actress, Minnie Maddern Piske, asking htm to write something 
that would aid her in her crusade against bull-fighting. The 
idea aouealed to him: he replied at once. 

To Mrs. Fiske: 

Dear Mrs. Fiske,— I shall certainly write the story. 
Put I may not get it to suit me, in which case it will go 

777 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

in the fire. Later I will try again — and yet again — and 
azain. I am used to this. It has taken me twelve years 
to write a short story — the shortest one I ever wrote, I 
think. 1 So do not be discouraged ; I will stick to this one 
in the same way. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

He did not delay in his beginning, and a few weeks later was 
sending word to his publisher about it. 

To Frederick A. Duneka, in New York: 

OcL *, 'o$. 

Dear Mr. Duneka,— I have just finished a short storv 
which I "greatly admire/' and so will you— "A Horse's 
Tale" — about 15,000 words, at a rough guess. It has 
good fun in it, and several characters, and is lively. I 
shall finish revising it in a few days or more, then Jean 
will type it. 

Don't you think you can get it into the Jan. and Feb. 
numbers and issue it as a dollar booklet just after the 
middle of Jan. when you issue the Feb. number? 

It ought to be ably illustrated. 

Why not sell simultaneous rights, for this once, to the 
Ladies' Home Journal or Collier's, or both, and recoup 
yourself? — for I would like to get it to classes that can't 
afford Harper's. Although it doesn't preach, there's a 
sermon concealed in it. 

Yr sincerely, Mam. 

Five flays later he added some rather interesting facts con- 
cerning the new story. 

To F. A. Duneka, in New York: 

OcL 7, 1006. 

Dear Mr. Duneka, — . . . I've made a poor guess as to 
number of words. I think there must be 20,000. My 

■ Probably 41 The Death Disk." 
778 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



usual page of MS. contains about 130 words; but when I 
arn deeply interested in my work and dead to everything 
else, my hand-writing shrinks and shrinks until there's a 
great deal more than 130 on a page — oh, yes, a deal more. 
Well, I discover, this morning, that this tale is written in 
that small hand. 

This strong interest is natural, for the heroine is my 
daughter, Susy, whom we lost. It was not intentional — it 
was a good while before I found it out. 

So I am sending you her picture to use — and to repro- 
duce with photographic exactness the unsurpassable 
expression and all. May you find an artist who has lost 
an idol! 

Take as good care of the picture as you can and restore 
it to me when I come. 

I hope you will illustrate this tale considerably. Not 
humorous pictures. No. When they are good (or bad) 
one's humor gets no chance to play surprises on the 
reader. A humorous subject illustrated seriously is all 
right, but a humorous artist is no fit person for such work. 
You see, the humorous writer pretends to absolute serious- 
ness (when he knows his trade) then for an artist to step 
in and give his calculated gravity all away with a funny 
picture — oh, my land ! It gives me the dry gripes just to 
think of it. It would be just about up to the average 
comic artist's intellectual level to make a funny picture 
of the horse kicking the lungs out of a trader. Hang it, 
the remark is funny — because the horse is not aware of 
it — but the fact is not humorous, it is tragic and it is no 
subject for a humorous picture. 

Could I be allowed to sit in judgment upon the pictures 
before they are accepted — at least those in which Cathy 
may figure? 

This is not essential. It is but a suggestion, and it is 
hereby withdrawn, if it would be troublesome or cause 
delay. 

I hope you will reproduce the cat-pile, full page. 
And save the photo for me in as good condition as pos- 

779 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



siblc. When Susy and Clara were little tots those cats had 
their profoundest worship, and there is no duplicate of 
this picture. These cats all had thundering names, or in- 
appropriate ones— furnished by the children with my 
help. One was named Buffalo Bill. 

Are you interested in coincidences? 

After discovering, about the middle of the book, 
that Cathy was Susy Clemens, I put her picture with 
my MS., to be reproduced. After the book was finished 
it was discovered that Susy had a dim model of Soidur 
Boy in her arms; I had forgotten all about that toy. 

Then I examined the cat-picture and laid it with the 
MS. for introduction; but it was not until yesterday 
that I remembered that one of the cats was named Bujffa^ 
Bill. 

Sincerely yours, 

Mark. 

The reference in this letter to shrinkage of his hand -writing 
with the increasing intensity of his interest, and the consequent 
addition of the number of words to the page, recalls another 
fact, noted by Mr. Duneka, viz.: that because of his terse 
Anglo-Saxon diction, Mark Twain could put more words on a 
magazine page than any other writer. It is hardly necessary 
to add that he got more force into what he put on the page for 
the same reason. 

There was always a run of reporters at Mark Twain's New 
York home. His opinion was sought for on every matter of 
public interest, and whatever happened to him in particular 
was considered good for at least half a column of copy, with his 
name as a catch-line at the top. When it was learned that he 
was to spend the summer in New Hampshire, the reporters had 
all wanted to find out about it. Now that the summer was 
ending, they began to want to know how he had liked it, what 
work he had done and what were his plans for another year. As 
they frequently applied to his publishers for these details it was 
finally suggested to him that he write a letter furnishing the 
required information. His reply, handed to Mr. Duneka, who 
was visiting him at the moment, is full of interest. 

780 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Mem. for Mr. Duneka: 

Dublin, Oct. 9, 190$. 

. . . As to the other matters, here are the details. 

Yes, I have tried a number of summer homes, here and 
in Europe together. 

Each of these homes had charms of its own; charms and 
delights of its own, and some of them — even in Europe — 
had comforts. Several of them had conveniences, too. 
They all had a "view." 

It is my conviction that there should always be some 
water in a view — a lake or a river, but not the ocean, 
if you are down on its level. I think that when you are 
down on its level it seldom inflames you with an ecstasy 
which you could not get out of a sand-flat. It is like 
being on board ship, over again; indeed it is worse than 
that, for there's three months of it. On board ship one 
tires of the aspects in a couple of days, and quits looking. 
The same vast circle of heaving humps is spread around 
you all the time, with you in the centre of it and never 
gaining an inch on the horizon, so far as you can see; 
for variety, a flight of flying-fish, mornings; a flock of 
porpoises throwing summersaults afternoons; a remote 
whale spouting, Sundays; occasional phosphorescent 
effects, nights; every other day a streak of black smoke 
trailing along under the horizon; on the one single red 
letter day, the illustrious iceberg. I have seen that ice- 
berg thirty-four times in thirty-seven voyages; it is 
always the same shape, it is always the same size, it 
always throws up the same old flash when the sun strikes 
it; you may set it on any New York door-step of a June 
morning and light it up with a mirror-flash; and I will 
engage to recognize it. It is artificial, and it is provided 
and anchored out by the steamer companies. I used to 
like the sea, but I was young then, and could easily get 
excited over any kind of monotony, and keep it up till 
the monotonies ran out, if it was a fortnight. 

Last January, when we were beginning to inquire about 
11.-22 78 1 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



a home for this summer, I remembered that Abbott 
Thayer had said, three years before, that the New Hac:> 
shire highlands was a good place. He was right — it was 
a good place. Any place that is good for an artist in 
paint is good for an artist in morals and ink. Brush is 
here, too; so is Col. T. W. Higginson; so is Raphael 
Pumpelly; so is Mr. Secretary Hitchcock; so is Hender- 
son; so is Learned; so is Sumner; so is Franklin Mac- 
Veigh; so is Joseph L. Smith; so is Henry Copley Greene, 
when I am not occupying his house, which I am doing 
this season. Paint, literature, science, statesmanship, 
history, professorship, law, morals, — these are all repre- 
sented here, yet crime is substantially unknown. 

The summer homes of these refugees are sprinkled, a 
mile apart, among the forest-clad hills, with access to 
each other by firm smooth country roads which are so 
embowered in dense foliage that it is always twilight in 
there, and comfortable. The forests are spider-webbed 
with these good roads, they go everywhere; but for the 
help of the guide-boards, the stranger would not arrive 
anywhere. 

The village — Dublin — is bunched together in its own 
place, but a good telephone service makes its markets 
handy to all those outliars. I have spelt it that way to 
be witty. The village executes orders on the Boston 
plan — promptness and courtesy. 

The summer homes are high-perched, as a rule, and 
have contenting outlooks. The house we occupy has 
one. Monadnock, a soaring double hump, rises into the 
sky at its left elbow — that is to say, it is close at hand. 
From the base of the long slant of the mountain the 
valley spreads away to the circling frame of the hills, 
and beyond the frame the billowy sweep of remote great 
ranges rises to view and flows, fold upon fold, wave upon 
wave, soft and blue and unwordly, to the horizon fifty 
miles away. In these October days Monadnock and the 
valley and its framing hills make an inspiring picture to 
look at, for they are sumptuously splashed and mottled 

782 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and be-torched from sky-line to sky-line with the richest 
dyes the autumn can furnish; and when they lie flaming 
in the full drench of the mid-afternoon sun, the sight 
aflects the spectator physically, it stirs his blood like 
military music. 

These summer homes are commodious, well built, — 
and well furnished — facts which sufficiently indicate that 
the owners built them to live in themselves. They have 
furnaces and wood fireplaces, and the rest of the com- 
forts and conveniences of a city home, and can be com- 
fortably occupied all the year round. 

We cannot have this house next season, but I have se- 
cured Mrs. Upton's house which is over in the law and 
science quarter, two or three miles from here, and about 
the same distance from the art, literary, and scholastic 
groups. The science and law quarter has needed im- 
proving, this good while. 

The nearest railway-station is distant something like 
an hour's drive; it is three hours from there to Boston, ,^ 
over a branch line. You can go to New York in six hours 
per branch lines if you change cars every time you think 
of it, but it is better to go to Boston and stop over and 
take the trunk line next day, then you do not get lost. 

It is claimed that the atmosphere of the New Hamp- 
shire highlands is exceptionally bracing and stimulating, 
and a fine aid to hard and continuous work. It is a just 
claim, I think. I came in May, and wrought 35 successive 
days without a break. It is possible that I could not have 
done it elsewhere. I do not know; I have not had any 
disposition to try it, before. I think I got the disposition 
out of the atmosphere, this time. I feel quite sure, in 
fact, that that is where it came from. 

I am ashamed to confess what an intolerable pile of 
manuscript I ground out in the 35 days, therefore I will 
keep the number of words to myself. I wrote the first 
half of a long tale — "The Adventures of a Microbe" — 
and put it away for a finish next summer, and started 
another long tale — "The Mysterious Stranger;" I wrote 

783 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAINS LETTERS 



the first half of it and put it with the other for a finish 
next summer. I stopped, then. I was not tired, bat I 
no books on hand that needed finishing this year 
one that was seven years old. After a little I took that 
one up and finished it. Not for publication, but to have 
it ready for revision next summer. 

Since I stopped work I have had a two months* holi- 
day. The summer has been my working time for 35 
years; to have a holiday in it (in America) is new for me. 
I have not broken it, except to write "Eve's Diary" and 
"A Horse's Tale" — short things occupying the mill 12 
days. 

This year our summer is 6 months long and ends 
with November and the flight home to New York, but 
next year we hope and expect to stretch it another month 
and end it the first of December. 

[No signature ] 



The fact that he was a persistent smoker was widely 
and many friends and admirers of Mark Twain sent him 
most of which he could not use, because they were too 
He did not care for Havana cigars, but smoked the 
inexpensive domestic tobacco with plenty of "pep" in it, as we 
say to-day. Now and then he had an opportunity to head on 
some liberal friend, who wrote asking permission to contribute 
to his cigar collection, as instance the following. 

To Rev. L. M. Powers, in Haverhill, Mass.: 

Mw. 0, 100$. 

Dear Mr. Powers, — I should accept your hospitable 
offer at once but for the fact I couldn't do it and remain 
honest. That is to say if I allowed you to send me what 
you believe to be good cigars it would distinctly mean that 
I meant to smoke them, whereas I should do nothing of 
the kind. I know a good cigar better than you do, for I 
have had 60 years experience. 

No, that is not what I mean; I mean I know a bad 
cigar better than anybody else; I judge bv the price 

784 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



only: if it costs above 5 cents I know it to be either 
foreign or half -foreign, and unsmokeable. By me. I 
have many boxes of Havana cigars, of all prices from 20 
cts apiece up to 1.66 apiece; I bought none of them, they 
were all presents, they are an accumulation of several 
years. I have never smoked one of them and never shall, 
I work them off on the visitor. You shall have a chance 
when you come. 

Pessimists are born not made; optimists are born not 
made; but no man is born either pessimist wholly or 
optimist wholly, perhaps; he is pessimistic along certain 
lines and optimistic along certain others. That is my 
case. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

In spite of all the fine photographs that were made of him, 
there recurred constantly among those sent him to be auto- 
graphed a print of one which, years before, Sarony had made 
and placed on public sale. It was a good photograph, mechan- 
ically and even artistically, but it did not please Mark Twain. 
Whenever he saw it he recalled Sarony with bitterness and 
severity. Once he received an inquiry concerning it, and thus 
feelingly expressed himself. 

To Mr. Row {no address): 

21 Fifth Avenue, New York, 
November 74, 100$. 

Dear Mr. Row, — That alleged portrait has a private 
history. Sarony was as much of an enthusiast about wild 
animals as he was about photography; and when Du 
Chaill u brought the first Gorilla to this country in 1819 
he came to me in a fever of excitement and asked me if 
my father was of record and authentic. I said he was; 
then Sarony, without any abatement of his excitement 
asked if my grandfather also was of record and authentic. 
I said he was. Then Sarony, with still rising excitement 
and with joy added to it, said he had found my great 
grandfather in the person of the gorilla and had rec- 

785 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ognized him at once by his resemblance to me. I was 
deeply hurt but did not reveal this, because I knew 
Sarony meant no offense for the gorilla had not done him 
any harm, and he was not a man who would say an 
unkind thing about a gorilla wantonly. I went with 
him to inspect the ancestor, and examined him from 
several points of view, without being able to detect any- 
thing more than a passing resemblance. "Wait," said 
Sarony with strong confidence, "let me show you." He 
borrowed my overcoat and put it on the gorilla. The 
result was surprising. I saw that the gorilla while not 
looking distinctly like me was exactly what my great grand- 
father would have looked like if I had had one. baron v 
photographed the creature in that overcoat, and spread 
the picture about the world. It has remained spread 
about the world ever since. It turns up every week in 
some newspaper somewhere or other. It is not my fa- 
vorite, but to my exasperation it is everybody else's- 
Do you think you could get it suppressed for me? I will 
pay the limit. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemexs. 

The year 1905 closed triumphantly for Mark Twain. The 
great "Seventieth Birthday" dinner planned by Colonel George 
Harvey is remembered to-day as the most notable festival 
occasion in New York literary history. Other dinners and 
ovations followed. At seventy he had returned to the worki* 
more beloved, more honored than ever before. 



Digitized by Google 



XLV 



LETTERS, 1906, TO VARIOUS PERSONS. THE FAREWELL 
LECTURE. A SECOND SUMMER IN DUBLIN. 
BILLIARDS AND COPYRIGHT 

MARK TWAIN at " Pier Seventy," as he called it, paused to 
look backward and to record some memoirs of his long, 
eventful past. The Autobiography dictations begun in Florence 
were resumed, and daily he traveled back, recalling long-ago 
scenes and all-but-forgotten places. He was not without re- 
minders. Now and again there came some message that brought 
back the old days— the Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn days — or 
the romance of the river that he never recalled other than with 
tenderness and a tone of regret that it was gone. An invitation 
to the golden wedding of two ancient friends moved and sad- 
dened him, and his answer to it conveys about all the story of life. 

To Mr. and Mrs. Gordon: 

21 Fifth Avenue, 
Jan. 24, *o6. 

Dear Gordons, — I have just received your golden- 
wedding "At Home" and am trying to adjust my focus to 
it and realize how much it means. It is inconceivable! 
With a simple sweep it carries me back over a stretch of 
time measurable only in astronomical terms and geological 
periods. It brings before me Mrs. Gordon, young, round- 
limbed, handsome; and with her the Youngbloods and 
their two babies, and Laura Wright, that unspoiled 
little maid, that fresh flower of the woods and the prairies. 
Forty-eight years ago! 

Life was a fairy-tale, then, it is a tragedy now. When 
I was 43 and John Hay 41 he said life was a tragedy after 
40, and I disputed it. Three years ago he asked me to 

787 



Digitized by Google 




2- 




^ /-7 

tin- t~~ «*^J' L -' 

— 






MARK TWAIN's WRITING AT SEVENTY 




Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



testify again : I counted my graves, and there was nothing 
for me to say. 

I am old; I recognize it but I don't realize it. I wonder 
if a person ever really ceases to feel young — I mean, for a 
whole day at a time. My love to you both, and to all of 
us that are left. Mark. 

Though he used very little liquor of any kind, it was Mark 
Twain's custom to keep a bottle of Scotch whiskey with his 
collection of pipes and cigars and tobacco on a little table by his 
bed-side. During restless nights he found a small quantity of it 
conducive to sleep. Andrew Carnegie, learning of this custom, 
made it his business to supply Scotch of his own special impotra- 
ton. The first case came direct from Scotland. When it arrived 
Clemens sent this characteristic acknowledgment. 

To Andres Carnegi, in Scotland: 

21 Fifth Avb. Feb. io t *o6. 

Dear St. Andrew, — The whisky arrived in due course 
from over the water; last week one bottle of it was ex- 
tracted from the wood and inserted into me, on the in- 
stalment plan, with this result : that I believe it to be the 
best, smoothest whisky now on the planet. Thanks, oh, 
thanks: I have discarded Peruna. 

Hoping that you three are well and happy and will be 
coming back before the winter sets in. 

I am. 

Sincerely yours, Mark. 

It must have been a small bottle to be consumed by him in a 
week, or perhaps he had able assistance. The next brief line 
refers to the manuscript of his article, " Saint Joan of Arc, " pre- 
sented to the museum at Rouen. 

To Edward E. Clarke: 

21 Fifth Ave. Feb., 1006. 
Dear Sir, — I have found the original manuscript and 
with great pleasure I transmit it herewith, also a printed 
copy. 

789 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

It is a matter of great pride to me to have any word of 
mine concerning the world's supremest heroine honored 
by a place in that Museum. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clembks. 

The series of letters which follows was prepared by Mark 
Twain and General Fred Grant, mainly with a view of adver- 
tising the lecture that Clemens had agreed to deliver for thf 
benefit of the Robert Fulton Monument Association. It was 
in fact, to be Mark Twain's " farewell lecture," and the associa- 
tion had really proposed to pay him a thousand dollars for it_ 
The exchange of these letters, however, was never made out- 
side of Mark Twain's bed-room. Propped against the pillow? 
pen in hand, with General Grant beside him, they arranged the 
series with the idea of publication. Later the plan was dis- 
carded, so that this pleasant foolery appears here for the firs^ 
time. 

PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL 
(Correspondence ) 



Telegram 

Army Headquarters (date) 

Mark Twain, New York —Would you consider a pro- 
posal to talk at Carnegie Hall for the benefit of the Robert 
Fulton Monument Association, of which you are a Ykt 
President, for a fee of a thousand dollars? 

F. D. Grant, 

President, 
Fulton Monument Association. 

Telegraphic Answer: 

Major-General F. D. Grant, Army Headquarters, — I 
shall be glad to do it, but I must stipulate that you keep 

790 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the thousand dollars and add it to the Monument Fund 
as my contribution. 

Clemens. 

Letters: 

Dear Mr. Clemens,— You have the thanks of the 
Association, and the terms shall be as you say. But why 
give all of it? Why not reserve a portion — why should 
you do this work wholly without compensation? 

Truly yours 
Fred. D. Grant. 

Major General Grant, 
Army Headquarters. 

Dear General, — Because I stopped talking for pay 
a good many years ago, and I could not resume the 
habit now without a great deal of personal discomfort. 
I love to hear myself talk, because I get so much in- 
struction and moral upheaval out of it, but I lose the 
bulk of this joy when I charge for it. Let the terms 
stand. 

General, if I have your approval, I wish to use this 
good occasion to retire permanently from the platform. 

Truly yours 

S. L. Clemens. 

Dear Mr. Clemens, — Certainly. But as an old 
friend, permit me to say, Don't do that. Why should 
you? — you are not old yet. 

Yours truly, 

Fred D. Grant. 

Dear General, — I mean the pay-platform; I shan't 
retire from the gratis-platform until after I am dead 
and courtesy requires me to keep still and not disturb 
the others. 

What shall I talk about? My idea is this: to instruct 
the audience about Robert Fulton, and . . . Tell me — was 
that his real name, or was it his nom de plume? How- 

791 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ever, never mind, it is not important— I can skip it. and 
the house will think I knew all about it, but forgot 
Could you find out for me if he was one of the Signers 
of the Declaration, and which one? But if it is am* 
trouble, let it alone, I can skip it. Was he out with Paul 
Jones? Will you ask Horace Porter? And ask him if he 
brought both of them home. These will be very in- 
teresting facts, if they can be established. But never 
mind, don't trouble Porter, I can establish them any- 
way. The way I look at it, they are historical gems — gems 
of the very first water. 

Well, that is my idea, as I have said: first, excite 
the audience with a spoonful of information about Fulton, 
then quiet down with a barrel of illustration drawn by 
memory from my books — and if you don't say anything 
the house will think they never heard of it before, be- 
cause people don't really read your books, they only say 
they do, to keep you from feeling bad. Next, exdte 
the house with another spoonful of Fultonian fact, then 
tranquilize them again with another barrel of illustration. 
And so on and so on, all through the evening; and if you 
are discreet and don't tell them the illustrations don't 
illustrate anything, they won't notice it and I will send 
them home as well-informed about Robert Fulton as I 
am myself. Don't be afraid; I know all about audiences, 
they believe everything you say, except when you are 
telling the truth. Truly yours, 

S. L. Clemeks. 

P.S. Mark all the advertisements "Private and Con- 
fidential" otherwise the people will not read them. 

M. T. 

Dear Mr. Clemens, — How long shall you talk? I ask 
in order that we may be able to say when carriages may be 
called. Very Truly yours, 

Hugh Gordon Miller, 

Secretary. 

79* 



Digitized by Google 



JO. 



* Co jo tr it^-u 



• . * 



• . . . 



JJoXf j w.ti. Of sei.C 0y AucTien 

<r->-^j 



IHSTROMFfifrAL MUSIC, [ff^f^ 




MARK TWAIN'S COPY FOR LECTURE ANNOUNCEMENT 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Dear Mr. Miller, — I cannot say for sure. It is 
my custom to keep on talking till I get the audience 
cowed. Sometimes it takes an hour and fifteen minutes, 
sometimes I can do it in an hour. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Mem. My charge is 2 boxes free. Not the choicest- 
sell the choicest, and give me any 6-seat boxes you please 

S. L. C. 

I want Fred Grant (in uniform) on the stage ; also the 
rest of the officials of the Association; also other dis- 
tinguished people — all the attractions we can get. Also, 
a seat for Mr. Albert Bigelow Paine, who may be useful 
to me if he is near me and on the front. 

S. L. C. 

The seat chosen for the writer of these notes was to be at the 
front of the stage in order that the lecturer might lean over no» 
and then and pretend to be asking information concerning 
Fulton. I was not entirely happy in the thought of this shcmy 
honor, and breathed more freely when this plan was abandonee 
and the part assigned to General Grant. 

The lecture was given in Carnegie Hall, which had been gayW 
decorated for the occasion. The house was more than filkvi- 
and a great sum of money was realized for the fund. 

It was that spring that Gorky and Tchaikowski, the Russi&r 
revolutionists, came to America hoping to arouse interest ^ 
their cause. The idea of the overthrow of the Russian dynasty 
was pleasant to Mark Twain. Few things would have given h:rr. 
greater comfort than to have known that a little more than tcr 
years would see the downfall of Russian imperialism. Th* 
letter which follows was a reply to an invitation from Tchaikow 
ski, urging him to speak at one of the meetings. 

Dear Mr. Tchaikowski, — I thank you for the horxr 
of the invitation, but I am not able to accept it, because 
on Thursday evening I shall be presiding at a meeting 

794 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



whose object is to find remunerative work for certain 
classes of our blind who would gladly support them- 
selves if they had the opportunity. 

My sympathies are with the Russian revolution, of 
course. It goes without saying. I hope it will succeed, 
and now that I have talked with you I take heart to be- 
lieve it will. Government by falsified promises, by lies, 
by treacheries, and by the butcher-knife for the aggran- 
dizement of a single family of drones and its idle and 
vicious kin has been borne quite long enough in Russia, 
I should think, and it is to be hoped that the roused 
nation, now rising in its strength, will presently put an 
end to it and set up the republic in its place. Some of 
us, even of the white headed, may live to see the blessed 
day when Czars and Grand Dukes will be as scarce there 
as I trust they are in heaven. 

Most sincerely yours, 

Mark Twain. 

There came another summer at Dublin, New Hampshire, this 
time in the fine Upton residence on the other slope of Monadnock, 
a place of equally beautiful surroundings, and an even more 
extended view. Clemens was at this time working steadily on 
his so-called Autobiography, which was not that, in fact, but a 
series of remarkable chapters, reminiscent, reflective, com- 
mcntative, written without any particular sequence as to time 
or subject-matter. He dictated these chapters to a stenographer, 
usually in the open air, sitting in a comfortable rocker or pacing 
up and down the long veranda that faced a vast expanse of 
wooded slope and lake and distant blue mountains. It became 
one of the happiest occupations of his later years. 

To W. D. Howells, in Maine: 

Dublin, Sunday, June 17, '06. 
Dear Howells, — . . . The dictating goes lazily and 
pleasantly on. With intervals. I find that I have been 
at it, off and on, nearly two hours a day for 155 days, 
since Jan. 9. To be exact I've dictated 75 hours in 80 days 

795 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



and loafed 7 5 days. I've added 60,000 words in the month 
that I've been here; which indicates that I've dictated 
during 20 days of that time — 40 hours, at an average of 
1,500 words an hour. It's a plenty, and I am satisfied- 

There's a good deal of "fat" I've dictated, (from Jan. 9) 
210,000 words, and the "fat" adds about 50,000 more. 

The "fat" is old pigeon-holed things, of the years 
gone by, which I or editors didn't das't to print. For 
instance, I am dumping in the little old book which I 
read to you in Hartford about 30 years ago and which 
you said "publish — and ask Dean Stanley to furnish an 
introduction ; he'll do it . " (" Captain Stormfield's Visit tu 
Heaven.") It reads quite to suit me, without altering a 
word, now that it isn't to see print until I am dead. 

To-morrow I mean to dictate a chapter which will get 
my heirs and assigns burnt alive if they venture to print 
it this side of 2006 A.D. — which I judge they won t 
There'll be lots of such chapters if I live 3 or 4 years 
longer. The edition of A.D. 2006 will make a stir when 
it comes out. I shall be hovering around taking notice, 
along with other dead pals. You are invited. Mark. 

His tendency to estimate the measure of the work he wls 
doing, and had completed, must have clung to him from his oVi 
printer days. 

The chapter which was to get his heirs and assigns burned 
alive was on the orthodox God, and there was more than ok 
such chapter. In the next letter he refers to two exquisite poems 
by Howells, and the writer of these notes recalls his wonderfV 
reading of them aloud. In Our Town was a collection of shor 
stories then recently issued by William Allen White, Howe&s 
had recommended them. 

To W. D. Howells, in Maine: 

21 Fifth* Ave., Tuesday £»» 
Dear Howells, — It is lovely of you to say those beauti- 
ful things— I don't know how to thank you enough. Be: 
I love you, that I know. 

796 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I read "After the Wedding" aloud and we felt all the 
pain of it and the truth. It was very moving and very 
beautiful — would have been overcomingly moving, at 
times, but for the haltings and pauses compel] ed by the 
difficulties of MS — these were a protection, in that 
they furnished me time to brace up my voice, and get a 
new start. Jean wanted to keep the MS for another 
reading — aloud, and for "keeps," too, I suspected, but 
I said it would be safest to write you about it. 

I like "In Our Town," particularly that Colonel, of 
the Lookout Mountain Oration, and very particularly 
pages 212-16. I wrote and told White so. 

After "After the Wedding" I read "The Mother" 
aloud and sounded its human deeps with your deep-sea 
lead. I had not read it before, since it was first pub- 
lished. 

I have been dictating some fearful things, for 4 succes- 
sive mornings — for no eye but yours to see until I have 
been dead a century — if then. But I got them out of my 
system, where they had been festering for years — and 
that was the main thing. I feel better, now. 

I came down to-day on business — from house to house 
in 1 2)4 hours, and expected to arrive dead, but am neither 
tired nor sleepy. Yours as always 

Mark. 

To William Allen White, in Emporia, Kans.: 

Dublin, New Hampshire, 
Junf 24, 1906. 

Dear Mr. White,— Howells told me that "In Our 
Town" was a charming book, and indeed it is. All of 
it is delightful when read one's self, parts of it can 
score finely when subjected to the most exacting of 
tests — the reading aloud. Pages 197 and 216 are of 
that grade. I have tried them a couple of times on the 
family, and pages 212 and 216 are qualified to fetch any 
house of any country, caste or color, endowed with 

11-23 797 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



those riches which are denied to no nation on the planet- 
humor and feeling. 
Talk again— the country is listening. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Witter Bynner, the poet, was one of the editors of McClurt i 
Magazine at this time, but was trying to muster the courage to 
give up routine work for verse-making and the possibility of 
poverty. Clemens was fond of Bynner and believed in his work 
He did not advise him, however, to break away entirely from a 
salaried position — at least not immediately; but one day 
Bynner did so, and reported the step he had taken, with son* 
doubt as to the answer he would receive. 

To Witter Bynner, in New York: 

Dublin, Oct. 5, /pod. 
Dear Poet, — You have certainly done right for 
several good reasons; at least, of them, I can name twe 
1. With your reputation you can have your freedcrr. 
and yet earn your living: 2. if you fall short of succeed- 
ing to your wish, your reputation will provide you ar- 
other job. And so in high approval I suppress the seed- 
ing and give you the saintly and fatherly pat instead. 

Mark Twain. 

On another occasion, when Bynner had written a poec to 
Clara Clemens, her father pretended great indignation that ti* 
first poem written by Bynner to any one in his household sfcocii 
not be to him, and threatened revenge. At dinner shortly after 
he produced from his pocket a slip of paper on which he had set 
down what he said was "his only poem." He read the lines tha: 
follow: 

"Of all sad words of tongue or pen, 
The saddest are these: It might have been. 
Ah, say not so! as life grows longer, leaner, thinner. 
We recognize, 0 God, it might have Bynner l M 

He returned to New York in October and soon after was pre- 
sented by Mrs. H. H. Rogers with a handsome billiard-tabk- 

798 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



He had a passion for the game, but had played comparatively 
little since the old Hartford days of fifteen years before, when a 
group of his friends used to assemble on Friday nights in the 
room at the top of the house for long, strenuous games and 
much hilarity. Now the old fever all came back ; the fascinations 
of the game superseded even his interest in the daily dictations. 

To Mrs. H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

21 Fifth Avenue, Monday % Nov., iqo6. 

Dear Mrs. Rogers,— The billiard table is better than 
the doctors. It is driving out the heartburn in a most 
promising way. I have a billiardist on the premises, and I 
walk not less than ten miles every day with the cue in my 
hand. And the walking is not the whole of the exercise, 
nor the most health-giving part of it, I think. Through 
the multitude of the positions and attitudes it brings into 
play every muscle in the body and exercises them all. 

The games begin right after luncheon, daily, and con- 
tinue until midnight, with 2 hours' intermission for 
dinner and music. And so it is 9 hours' exercise per 
day, and 10 or 12 on Sunday. Yesterday and last night 
it was 12 — and I slept until 8 this morning without 
waking. The billiard table, as a Sabbath breaker can 
beat any coal-breaker in Pennsylvania, and give it 30 in 
the game. If Mr. Rogers will take to daily billiards he 
can do without doctors and the massageur, I think. 

We are really going to build a house on my farm, an 
hour and a half from New York. It is decided. It is 
to be built by contract, and is to come within $25,000. 

With love and many thanks. 

S. L. C. 

P.S. Clara is in the sanitarium — till January 28 when 
her western concert tour will begin. She is getting to be 
a mighty competent singer. You must know Clara better; 
she is one of the very finest and completest and most 
satisfactory characters I have ever met. Others knew it 
before, but I have always been busy with other matters. 

799 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The " billiardist on the premises M was the writer of these notes, 
who, earlier in the year, had become his biographer, and, in the 
course of time, his daily companion and friend. The farm men- 
tioned was one which he had bought at Redding, Connecticut, 
where, later, he built the house known as "Stormfield." 

Henry Mills Alden, for nearly forty years editor of Harper s 
Magazine y arrived at his seventieth birthday on November nth 
that year, and Harper & Brothers had arranged to give him a 
great dinner in the offices of Franklin Square, where, for half a 
century, he had been an active force. Mark Twain, threatened 
with a cold, and knowing the dinner would be strenuous, did doc 
feel able to attend, so wrote a letter which, if found suitable, 
could be read at the gathering. 

To Mr, Henry Alden: 

Alden, — dear and ancient friend — it is a solemn 
moment. You have now reached the age of discretion. 
You have been a long time arriving. Many years ago 
you docked me on an article because the subject was 
too old; later, you docked me on an article because the 
subject was too new; later still, you docked me on ar. 
article because the subject was betwixt and between. 
Once, when I wrote a Letter to Queen Victoria, you did 
not put it in the respectable part of the Magazine, bu*. 
interred it in that potter's field, the Editor's Drawer. As 
a result, she never answered it. How often we recall, 
with regret, that Napoleon once shot at a magazine editor 
and missed him and killed a publisher. But we remember, 
with charity, that his intentions were good. 

You will reform, now, Alden. You will cease freer, 
these economies, and you will be discharged. But in 
your retirement you will carry with you the admiration 
and earnest good wishes of the oppressed and toiling 
scribes. This will be better than bread. Let this consok 
you when the bread fails. 

You will carry with you another thing, too — the 
affection of the scribes; for they all love you in spite cf 
your crimes. For you bear a kind heart in your breast 
and the sweet and winning spirit that charms away al 

800 

. I 

Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



hostilities and animosities, and makes of your enemy your 
friend and keeps him so. You have reigned over us 
thirty-six years, and, please God, you shall reign another 
thirty-six — "and peace to Mahmoud on his golden 
throne !" Always yours 

Mark 

A copyright bill was coming up in Washington and a delegation 
of authors went down to work for it. Clemens was not the head 
of the delegation, but he was the most prominent member of it, 
as well as the most useful. He invited the writer to accompany 
him, and elsewhere I have told in detail the story of that excur- 
sion, 1 which need be but briefly touched upon here. 

His work was mainly done aside from that of the delegation. 
They had him scheduled for a speech, however, which he made 
without notes and with scarcely any preparation. Meantime he 
had applied to Speaker Cannon for permission to allow him on 
the floor of the House, where he could buttonhole the Congress- 
men. He was not eligible to the floor without having received 
the thanks of Congress, hence the following letter: 

To Hon. Joseph Cannon, House of Representatives: 

Dec. 7, 1006. 

Dear Uncle Joseph, — Please get me the thanks 
of the Congress — not next week but right away. It is 
very necessary. Do accomplish this for your affectionate 
old friend right away; by persuasion, if you can, by 
violence if you must, for it is imperatively necessary that 
I get on the floor for two or three hours and talk to the 
members, man by man, in behalf of the support, encourage- 
ment and protection of one of the nation's most valuable 
assets and industries — its literature. I have arguments 
with me, also a barrel, with liquid in it. 

Give me a chance. Get me the thanks of Congress. 
Don't wait for others; there isn't time. I have stayed 
away and let Congress alone for seventy-one years and I 

, See Mark Twain: A Biography, chap. ccli. 

8oi 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



am entitled to thanks. Congress knows it perfectly well, 
and I have long felt hurt that this quite proper and earned 
expression of gratitude has been merely felt by the 
House and never publicly uttered. Send me an order on 
the Sergeant-at-Arms quick. When shall I come? With 
love and a benediction. 

Mark Twain. 

This was mainly a joke. Mark Twain did not expect any 
"thanks," but he did hope for access to the floor, which once, 
in an earlier day, had been accorded him. We drove to tie 
Capitol and he delivered his letter to "Uncle Joe" by hand. 
"Uncle Joe" could not give him the privilege of the floor; the 
rules had become more stringent. He declared they would han^ 
him if he did such a thing. He added that he had a private 
room down-stairs, where Mark Twain might establish head- 
quarters, and that he would assign his colored servant, Neal. ct 
long acquaintanceship with many of the members, to pass the 
word that Mark Twain was receiving. 

The result was a great success. All that afternoon members 
of Congress poured into the Speaker's room and, in an atmosphere 
blue with tobacco smoke, Mark Twain talked the gospel of copy- 
right to his heart's content. 

The bill did not come up for passage that session, but Mark 
Twain lived to see his afternoon's lobbying bring a return. Ir 
1909, Champ Clark, and those others who had gathered aroint: 
him that afternoon, passed a measure that added fourteen years 
to the copyright term. 

The next letter refers to a proposed lobby of quite a difteren: 
sort. 

To Helen Keller, in Wrentham, Mass.: 

21 Fifth Avenur, 
Dec. *o6. 

Dear Helen Keller, — . . . You say, "Asa reform- 
er, you know that ideas must be driven home again and 
again." 

Yes, I know it; and by old experience I know that 
speeches and documents and public meetings are a pretty 
poor and lame way of accomplishing it. Last year I 

80* 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



proposed a sane way — one which I had practiced with 
success for a quarter of a century — but I wasn't expect- 
ing it to get any attention, and it didn't. 

Give me a battalion of 200 winsome young girls and 
matrons, and let me tell them what to do and how to 
do it, and I will be responsible for shining results. If I 
could mass them on the stage in front of the audience 
and instruct them there, I could make a public meeting 
take hold of itself and do something really valuable for 
once. Not that the reed instruction would be done there, 
for it wouldn't; it would be previously done privately, 
and merely repeated there. 

But it isn't going to happen — the good old way will be 
stuck to: there'll be a public meeting: with music, and 
prayer, and a wearying report, and a verbal description 
of the marvels the blind can do, and 17 speeches — then 
the call upon all present who are still alive, to contribute. 
This hoary program was invented in the idiot asylum, 
and will never be changed. Its function is to breed 
hostility to good causes. 

Some day somebody will recruit my 200 — my dear 
beguilesome Knights of the Golden Fleece — and you will 
see them make good their ominous name. 

Mind, we must meet! not in the grim and ghastly air 
of the platform, mayhap, but by the friendly fire — here 
at 21. Affectionately your friend, 

S. L. Clemens. 

They did meet somewhat later that winter in the friendly 
parlors of No. ax, and friends gathered in to meet the marvelous 
blind girl and to pay tribute to Miss Sullivan (Mrs. Macy) for 
her almost incredible achievement. 



Digitized by Google 



XLVI 



LETTERS 1907-08. A DEGREE FROM OXFORD. THE NSW 

HOME AT REDDING 

THE author, J. Howard Moore, sent a copy of his book. T'&< 
Universal Kinship, with a letter in which he said: "Most 
humorists have no anxiety except to glorify themselves and ado 
substance to their pocket-books by making their readers laugh. 
You have shown, on many occasions, that your mission is not 
simply to antidote the melancholy of a world, but includes * 
real and intelligent concern for the general welfare of your 
fellow-man." 

The Universal Kinship was the kind of a book that Mark 
Twain appreciated, as his acknowledgment clearly shows. 

To Mr. J. Howard Moore: 

Feb. 2, '07. 

Dear Mr. Moore, — The book has furnished roe 
several days of deep pleasure and satisfaction; it has 
compelled my gratitude at the same time, since it saves 
me the labor of stating my own long-cherished opinions 
and reflections and resentments by doing it lucidly and 
fervently and irascibly for me. 

There is one thing that always puzzles me: as inheritors 
of the mentality of our reptile ancestors we have im- 
proved the inheritance by a thousand grades; but in the 
matter of the morals which they left us we have gooe 
backward as many grades. That evolution is strange, and 
to me unaccountable and unnatural. Necessarily we 
started equipped with their perfect and blemishless 
morals; now we are wholly destitute; we have no real 

804 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



morals, but only artificial ones — morals created and pre- 
served by the forced suppression of natural and hellish 
instincts. Yet we are dull enough to be vain of them. 
Certainly we are a sufficiently comical invention, we 
humans. Sincerely Yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Mark Twain's own books were always being excommunicated 
by some librarian, and the matter never failed to invite the atten- 
tion and amusement of the Dress, and the indignation of manv 
correspondents. Usually the books were Tom Sawyer and Uuck 
Finny the morals of which were not regarded as wholly exem- 
plary. But in 1007 a small library, in a very small town, 
attained a day's national notoriety by putting the ban on Eve's 
Diary, not so much on account of its text as for the chaste and 
exquisite illustrations by Lester Ralph. When the reporters 
came in a troop to learn about it, the author said: "I believe 
this time the trouble is mainly with the pictures. I did not 
draw them. I wish I had— they are so beautiful." 

Just at this time, Dr. William Lyon Phelps, of Yale, was giving 
a literary talk to the Teachers' Club, of Hartford, dwelling on the 
superlative value of Mark Twain's writings for readers old and 
young. Mrs. F. G. Whitmore, an old Hartford friend, wrote 
Clemens of the thines that Phelos had said, as consolation for 
Eve's latest banishment. This gave him a chance to add some- 
thing to what he had said to the reporters. 

To Mrs. Whitmore, in Hartford: 

Feb. 7, 1007. 

Dear Mrs. Whitmore,—- But the truth is, that when 
a Library expels a book of mine and leaves an unex- 
purgated Bible lying around where unprotected youth and 
age can get hold of it, the deep unconscious irony of it 
delights me and doesn't anger me. But even if it an- 
gered me such words as those of Professor Phelps would 
take the sting all out. Nobody attaches weight to the 
freaks of the Charlton Library, but when a man like 
Phelps speaks, the world gives attention. Some day I 
hope to meet him and thank him for his courage for 

80s 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



saying those things out in public. Custom is, to think a 
handsome thing in private but tame it down in the 
utterance. 

I hope you are all well and happy; and thereto I add my 
love. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

In May, 1907, Mark Twain was invited to England to receive 
from Oxford the degree of Literary Doctor. It was an honor that 
came to him as a sort of laurel crown at the end of a great career, 
and gratified him exceedingly. To Moberly Bell, of the London 
Times f he expressed his appreciation. Bell had been over in 
April and Clemens believed him concerned in the matter. 

To Moberly Bell, in London: 

21 Fifth Avenue, May j, '07. 
Dear Mr. Bell, — Your hand is in it ! and you have my 
best thanks. Although I wouldn't cross an ocean again 
for the price of the ship that carried me, I am glad to 
do it for an Oxford degree. I shall plan to sail for England 
a shade before the middle of June, so that I can have a 
few days in London before the 26th. 

Sincerely, S. L. Clemens. 

He had taken a house at Tuxedo for the summer, desiring to 
be near New York City, and in the next letter he writes Mr. 
Rogers concerning his London plans. We discover, also, in this 
letter that he has begun work on the Redding home and the 
cost is to come entirely out of the autobiographical chapters 
then running in the North American Renew. It may be of pass- 
ing interest to note here that he had the usual house-builder's 
fortune. He received thirty thousand dollars for the chapters; 
the house cost him nearly double that amount. 

To H. H. Rogers, in New York: 

Tuxedo Park. 
May '07. 

Dear Admiral, — Why hang it, I am not going to see 
you and Mrs. Rogers at all in England! It is a great dis- 

806 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



appointment. I leave there a month from now— June 29. 
No, I shall see you; for by your itinerary you are most 
likely to come to London June 21st or along there. So 
that is very good and satisfactory. I have declined 
all engagements but two — Whitelaw Reid (dinner) June 
2i, and the Pilgrims (lunch), June 25. The Oxford cere- 
mony is June 26. I have paid my return passage in the 
Minne-something, but it is just possible that I may want 
to stay in England a week or two longer — I can't tell, 
yet. I do very much want to meet up with the boys for 
the last time. 

I have signed the contract for the building of the 
house on my Connecticut farm and specified the cost 
limit, and work has been begun. The cost has to all 
come out of a year's instalments of Autobiography in the 
N. A. Review. 

Clara is winning her way to success and distinction with 
sure and steady strides. By all accounts she is singing 
like a bird, and is not afraid on the concert stage any 
more. 

Tuxedo is a charming place; I think it hasn't its equal 
anywhere. 

Very best wishes to you both. 

S. L. C. 

The story of Mark Twain's extraordinary reception and 
triumph in England has been told. 1 It was, in fact, the 
crowning glory of his career. Perhaps one of the most satis- 
factory incidents of his sojourn was a dinner given to him by 
the staff of Punch, in the historic offices at 10 Bouverie Street 
where no other foreign visitor had been thus honored — a notable 
distinction. When the dinner ended, little Joy Agnew, daughter 
of the chief editor, entered and d resented to the chief en est the 
original drawing of a cartoon by Bernard Partridge, which had 
appeared on the front page of Punch. In this picture the pre- 
siding genius of the paper is offering to Mark Twain health, 
long life, and happiness from « The Punch Bowl." 

l Marh Twain: A Biography, chaps, cclvi-cclix. 

807 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



A short time after his return to America he received a pretty 
childish letter from little Miss Agnew acknowledging a photo- 
graph he had sent her, and giving a list of her pets and occupa- 
tions. Such a letter always delighted Mark Twain, and his 
pleasure in this one is reflected in his reply. 

To Miss Joy Agnew, in London: 

Tuxedo Park, New You. 

Unto you greetings and salutation and worship, you 
dear, sweet little rightly-named Joy! I can see you now 
almost as vividly as I saw you that night when you sat 
flashing and beaming upon those sombre swallow-tails. 

"Fair as a star when only one 

Is shining in the sky." 

Oh, you were indeed the only one — there wasn't even 
the remotest chance of competition with you, dear! 
Ah, you are a decoration, you little witch! 

The idea of your house going to the wanton expense 
of a flower garden ! — aren't you enough ? And what do you 
want to go and discourage the other flowers for? Is that 
the right spirit? is it considerate? is it kind? How do 
you suppose they feel when you come around — looking the 
way you look? And you so pink and sweet and dainty 
and lovely and supernatural? Why, it makes them feel 
embarrassed and artificial, of course; and in my opinion 
it is just as pathetic as it can be. Now then you want to 
reform — dear — and do right. 

Well certainly you are well off, Joy: 

3 bantams; 

3 goldfish; 

3 doves; 

6 canaries; 

2 dogs; 

i cat ; 

All you need, now, to be permanently beyond the 
reach of want, is one more dog — just one more good, 
gentle, high principled, affectionate, loyal dog who 
wouldn't want any nobler service than the golden privilege 

808 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



of lying at your door, nights, and biting everything that 
came along — and I am that very one, and ready to come 
at the dropping of a hat. 

Do you think you could convey my love and thanks 
to your "daddy" and Owen Seaman and those other 
oppressed and down-trodden subjects of yours, you dar- 
ling small tyrant? 

On my knees ! These— with the kiss of fealty from your 
other subject— Mark Twain. 

Elinor Glyn, author of Three Weeks and other erotic tales, 
was in America that winter and asked permission to call on 
Mark Twain. An appointment was made and Clemens dis- 
cussed with her, for an hour or more, those crucial phases of 
life which have made living a complex problem since the days 
of Eve in Eden. Mrs. Glyn had never before heard anything 
like Mark Twain's wonderful talk, and she was anxious to print 
their interview. She wrote what she could remember of it and 
sent it to him for approval. If his conversation had been frank, 
his refusal was hardly less so. 

To Mrs. Elinor Glyn, in New York: 

Jan. 22 % t o8. 

Dear Mrs. Glyn, — It reads pretty poorly — I get the 
sense of it, but it is a poor literary job; however, it would 
have to be that because nobody can be reported even 
approximately, except by a stenographer. Approxima- 
tions, synopsized speeches, translated poems, artificial 
flowers and chromos all have a sort of value, but it is 
small. If you had put upon paper what I really said it 
would have wrecked your type-machine. I said some 
fetid, over-vigorous things, but that was because it was a 
confidential conversation. I said nothing for print. My 
own report of the same conversation reads like Satan 
roasting a Sunday school. It, and certain other readable 
chapters of my autobiography will not be published until 
all the Clemens family are dead — dead and correspondingly 
indifferent. They were written to entertain me, not the 

809 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



rest of the world. I am not here to do good — at least not 
to do it intentionally. You must pardon me for dictat- 
ing this letter; I am sick a-bed and not feeling as well as 
I might. Sincerely Yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Among the cultured men of England Mark Twain had no 
greater admirer, or warmer friend, than Andrew Lang. They 
were at one on most literary subjects, and especially so in their 
admiration of the life and character of Joan of Arc. Both had 
written of her, and both held her to be something almost more 
than mortal. When, therefore, Anatole France published his 
exhaustive biography of the maid of Domremy, a book in which 
he followed, with exaggerated minuteness and innumerable foot- 
notes, every step of Joan's physical career at the expense of her 
spiritual life, which he was inclined to cheapen, Lang wrote fed 
ingly, and with some contempt, of the performance, inviting the 
author of the Personal Recollections to come to the rescue of then- 
heroine. "Compare every one of his statements with the pas- 
sages he cites from authorities, and make him the laughter of the 
world " he wrote. " If you are lazy about comparing I can make 
you a complete set of what the authorities say, and of what this 
amazing novelist says that they say. When I tell you that be 
thinks the Epiphany (January 6, Twelfth Night) is December 
25th— Christmas Day— you begin to see what an egregious ass 
he is. Treat him like Dowden, and oblige" — a reference to 
Mark Twain's defense of Harriet Shelley, in which he had heaped 
ridicule on Dowden 's Life of the Poet— a. masterly performance; 
one of the best that ever came from Mark Twain's pen. 

Lang's suggestion would seem to have been a welcome 00c 

To Andrew Lang, in London: 

New York, April 25. 1908. 
Dear Mr. Lang, — I haven't seen the book nor any 
review of it, but only not very-understandable references 
to it — of a sort which discomforted me, but of course 
set my interest on fire. I don't want to have to read it 
in French— I should lose the nice shades, and should do a 
lot of gross misinterpreting, too. But there'll be a trans- 

810 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



lation soon, nicht wahr? I will wait for it. I note with 
joy that you say: "If you are lazy about comparing, 
(which I most certainly am), I can make you a com- 
plete set of what the authorities say, and of what this 
amazing novelist says that they say." 

Ah, do it for me! Then I will attempt the article, and 
(if I succeed in doing it to my satisfaction,) will publish 
it. It is long since I touched a pen (3}^ years), and I was 
intending to continue this happy holiday to the gallows, 
but — there are things that could beguile me to break this 
blessed Sabbath. Yours very sincerely, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Certainly it is an interesting fact that an Englishman— one 
of the race that burned Joan— should feel moved to defend her 
memory against the top-heavy perversions of a distinguished 
French auther. 

But Lang seems never to have sent the notes. The copying 
would have been a tremendous task, and perhaps he never 
found the time for it. We may regret to-day that he did not, 
for Mark Twain's article on the French author's Joan would 
have been at least unique. 

Samuel Clemens could never accustom himself to the loss of 
his wife. From the time of her death, marriage — which had 
brought him his greatest joy in life — presented itself to him 
always with the thought of bereavement, waiting somewhere 
just behind. The news of an approaching wedding saddened 
him and there was nearly always a somber tinge in his con- 
gratulations, of which the following to a dear friend is an example : 

, To Father Fitz-Simon, in Washington: 

June 5, 'oS. 

Dear Father Fitz-Simon, — Marriage — yes, it is the 
supreme felicity of life, I concede it. And it is also the 
supreme tragedy of life. The deeper the love the surer 
the tragedy. And the more disconsolating when it comes. 

And so I congratulate you. Not perfunctorily, not 
lukewarmly, but with a fervency and fire that no word in 

811 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the dictionary is strong enough to convey. And in 
the same breath and with the same depth and sin- 
cerity, I grieve for you. Not for both of you and not for 
the one that shall go first, but for the one that is fated 
to be left behind. For that one there is no recompense— 
For that one no recompense is possible. 

There are times — thousands of times — when I can 
expose the half of my mind, and conceal the other half, 
but in the matter of the tragedy of marriage I feel too 
deeply for that, and I have to bleed it all out or shut it all 
in. And so you must consider what I have been through, 
and am passing through and be charitable with me. 

Make the most of the sunshine! and I hope it will last 
long — ever so long. 

I do not really want to be present; yet for friend- 
ship's sake and because I honor you so, I would be there 
if I could. Most sincerely your friend, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The new home at Redding was completed in the spring of 
1908, and on the 18th of June, when it was entirely fitted and 
furnished, Mark Twain entered it for the first time. He had 
never even seen the place nor carefully examined plans which 
John Howeils had made for his house. He preferred the sur- 
prise of it, and the general avoidance of detail. That he was 
satisfied with the result will be seen in his letters. He named 
it at first "Innocence at Home"; later changing this title to 
"Stormfield." 

The letter which follows is an acknowledgment of an interesting 
souvenir from the battle-field of Tewksbury (147 1), and some 
relics of the Cavalier and Roundhead Regiments encamped a: 
Tewksbury in 1643. 

To an English admirer: 

Innocence at Home, Redding, Connecticut, 

Aug. /5, '08. 

Dear Sir, — I highly prize the pipes, and shall intimate 
to people that " Raleigh " smoked them, and doubtless 
he did. After a little practice I shall be able to go 

812 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



further and say he did; they will then be the most in- 
teresting features of my library's decorations. The 
Horse-shoe is attracting a good deal of attention, be- 
cause I have intimated that the conqueror's horse cast it; 
it will attract more when I get my hand in and say he 
cast it, I thank you for the pipes and the shoe; and also 
for the official guide, which I read through at a single 
sitting. If a person should say that about a book of mine 
I should regard it as good evidence of the book's interest. 

Very truly yours, 

). L. Clemens. 

In his philosophy, What Is Man?, and now and again in his 
other writings, we find Mark Twain giving small credit to the 
human mind as an originator of ideas. The most original writer 
of his time, he took no credit for pure invention and allowed none 
to others. The mind, he declared, adapted, consciously or un- 
consciously; it did not create. In a letter which follows he eluci- 
dates this doctrine. The reference in it to the "captain" and 
to the kerosene, as the reader may remember, have to do with 
Captain "Hurricane" Jones and his theory of the miracles of 
"Isaac and of the prophets of Baal," as expounded in Some 
Rambling Notes of an Idle Excursion. 

By a trick of memory Clemens gives The Little Duke as his 
suggestion for The Prince and the Pauper; he should have 
written The Prince and the Page, by the same author. 

To Rev. F. V. Christ, in New York: 

Redding, Conn., Aug., 'o8. 

Dear Sir,— You say 11 1 often owe my best sermons to 
a suggestion received in reading or from other exterior 
sources." Your remark is not quite in accordance with 
the facts. We must change it to — " I owe all my thoughts, 
sermons and ideas to suggestions received from sources 
outside of myself. The simplified English of this proposi- 
tion is— "No man's brains ever originated an idea." It 
is an astonishing thing that after all these ages the world 
goes on thinking the human brain machinery can originate 
a thought. 

n-24 813 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It can't. It never has done it. In all cases, little and 
big, the thought is born of a suggestion; and in all cases 
the suggestions come to the brain from the outside. The 
brain never acts except from exterior impulse. 

A man can satisfy himself of the truth of this by a 
single process, — let him examine every idea that occurs 
to Him in an hour; a day; in a week — in a lifetime if he 
please. He will always find that an outside something 
suggested the thought, something which he saw with his 
eyes or heard with his ears or perceived by his touch- 
not necessarily to-day, nor yesterday, nor last year, nor 
twenty years ago, but sometime or oilier. Usually the 
source of the suggestion is immediately traceable, but 
sometimes it isn't. 

However, if you will examine every thought that occurs 
to you for the next two days, you will find that in at least 
nine cases out of ten you can put your finger on the out- 
side suggestion — And that ought to convince you that No. 
10 had that source too, although you cannot at present 
hunt it down and find it. 

The idea of writing to me would have had to wait a 
long time if it waited until your brain originated it. It 
was born of an outside suggestion — Sir Thomas and my 
old Captain. 

The hypnotist thinks he has invented a new thing — 
suggestion. This is very sad. I don't know where my 
captain got his kerosene idea. (It was forty -one years 
ago, and he is long ago dead.) But I know that it didn*: 
originate in his head, but it was born from a suggestion 
from the outside. 

Yesterday a guest said, "How did you come to think 
of writing "The Prince and the Pauper?" I didn't. The 
thought came to me from the outside — suggested by that 
pleasant and picturesque little history-book, Charlotte 
M. Yonge's "Little Duke," I doubt if Mrs. Burnett knows 
whence came to her the suggestion to write "Little Lord 
Fauntleroy," but I know; it came to her from readras 
" The Prince and the Pauper." In all my life I have never 

814 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

originated an idea, and neither has she, nor anybody 
else. 

Man's mind is a clever machine, and can work up ma- 
terials into ingenious fancies and ideas, but it can't create 
the material; none but the gods can do that. In Sweden 
I saw a vast machine receive a block of wood, and turn 
it into marketable matches in two minutes. It could do 
everything but make the wood. That is the kind of 
machine the human mind is. Maybe this is not a large 
compliment, but it is all I can afford. . . 

Your friend and well-wisher. 

S. L. Clemens. 

To Mrs. H. H. Rogers, in Fair Haven, Mass.: 

Redding, Conn., Aug. 12, 1008. 

Dear Mrs. Rogers,— I believe I am the weUest man 
on the planet to-day, and good for a trip to Fair Haven 
(which I discussed with the Captain of the New Bedford 
boat, who pleasantly accosted me in the Grand Central 
August 5) but the doctor came up from New York day 
before yesterday, and gave positive orders that I must not 
stir from here before frost. It is because I was threat- 
ened with a swoon, 10 or 12 days ago, and went to New 
York a day or two later to attend my nephew's funeral 
and got horribly exhausted by the heat and came back 
here and had a bilious collapse. In 24 hours I was as 
sound as a nut again, but nobody believes it but me. 

This is a prodigiously satisfactory place, and I am so 
glad I don't have to go back to the turmoil and rush of 
New York. The house stands high and the horizons are 
wide, yet the seclusion is perfect. The nearest public 
road is half a mile away, so there is nobody to look in, 
and I don't have to wear clothes if I don't want to. I 
have been down stairs in night-gown and slippers a couple 
of hours, and have been photographed in that costume; 
but I will dress, now, and behave myself. 

That doctor had half an idea that there is something 

BiS 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



the matter with my brain. . . Doctors do know so little 
and they do charge so much for it. I wish Henry Rogers 
would come here, and I wish you would come with him. 
You can't rest in that crowded place, but you could res: 
here, for sure! I would learn bridge, and entertain you, 
and rob you. 
With love to you both, 

Ever yours, 

S. L. C. 

In the foregoing letter we get the first intimation of Mark 
Twain's failing health. The nephew who had died was Samuel 
E. Moffett, son of Pamela Clemens. Moffett, who was a dis- 
tinguished journalist— an editorial writer on Cottier's Weekly, 
a man beloved by all who knew him— had been drowned in the 
surf off the Jersey beach. 

To W. D. Howells, Kittery Point, Maine: 

Aug. 12, *o8. 

Dear Howells,— Won't you and Mrs. Howells and 
Mildred come and give us as many days as you can 
spare, and examine John's triumph? It is the most 
satisfactory house I am acquainted with, and the most 
satisfactorily situated. 

But it is no place to work in, because one is outside 
of it all the time, while the sun and the moon are on duty. 
Outside of it in the loggia, where the breezes blow and the 
tall arches divide up the scenery and frame it. 

It's a ghastly long distance to come, and I wouldn't 
travel such a distance to see anything short of a memorial 
museum, but if you can't come now you can at least come 
later when you return to New York, for the journey wH 
be only an hour and a half per express-train. Things are 
gradually and steadily taking shape inside the house, and 
nature is taking care of the outside in her ingenious ar>i 
wonderful fashion — and she is competent and asks no help 
and gets none. I have retired from New York for good 
I have retired from labor for good, I have dismissed my 

816 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



stenographer and have entered upon a holiday whose other 
end is in the cemetery. Yours ever, 

Mark. 

From a gentleman in Buffalo Clemens one day received a letter 
inclosing an incompleted list of the world's "One Hundred 
Greatest Men," men who had exerted "the largest visible influ- 
ence on the life and activities of the race." The writer asked 
that Mark Twain examine the list and suggest names, adding 
"would you include Jesus, as the founder of Christianity, in the 
list?" 

To the list of statesmen Clemens added the name of Thomas 
Paine; to the list of inventors, Edison and Alexander Graham 
Bell. The question he answered in detail. 

To , Buffalo, N. Y.: 

Private. Redding, Conn., Aug. 28, '08. 

Dear Sir, — By "private," I mean don't print any re- 
marks of mine. 

I like your list. 

The "largest visible influence." 

These terms require you to add Jesus. And they 
doubly and trebly require you to add Satan. From 
A.D. 350 to A.D. 1850 these gentlemen exercised a vaster 
influence over a fifth part of the human race than was 
exercised over that fraction of the race by all other in- 
fluences combined. Ninety-nine hundredths of this 
influence proceeded from Satan, the remaining fraction of 
it from Jesus. During those 1500 years the fear of Satan 
and HeU made 99 Christians where love of God and Heaven 
landed one. During those 1500 years, Satan's influence 
was worth very nearly a hundred times as much to the 
business as was the influence of all the rest of the Holy 
Family put together. 

You have asked me a question, and I have answered 
it seriously and sincerely. You have put in Buddha— a 
god, with a following, at one time, greater than Jesus 

817 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



ever had: a god with perhaps a little better evidence 
of bis godship than that which is offered for Jesus's. How 
then, in fairness, can you leave Jesus out? And if you 
put him in, how can you logically leave Satan out? 
Thunder is good, thunder is impressive; but it is the 
lightning that does the work. 

Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The "Children's Theatre" of the next letter was an institu- 
tion of the New York East Side in which Mark Twain was deeply 
interested. The children were most, if not all, of Hebrew parent- 
age, and the performances they gave, under the direction of 
Alice M. Herts, were really remarkable. It seemed a pity that 
lack of funds should have brought this excellent educational 
venture to an untimely end. 

The following letter was in reply to one inclosing a newspaper 
clipping reporting a performance of The Prince and the Pauper, 
given by Chicago school children. 

To Mrs. Hookway, in Chicago: 

Dear Mrs. Hook way, — Although I am full of the 
spirit of work this morning, a rarity with me lately — I 
must steal a moment or two for a word in person: for I 
have been reading the eloquent account in the Record- 
Herald and am pleasurably stirred, to my deepest deeps. 
The reading brings vividly back to me my pet and pride 
The Children's Theatre of the East side, New York. And 
it supports and re-affirms what I have so often and 
strenuously said in public that a children's theatre is 
easily the most valuable adjunct that any educational 
institution for the young can have, and that no other- 
wise good school is complete without it. 

It is much the most effective teacher of morals and 
promotor of good conduct that the ingenuity of man has 
yet devised, for the reason that its lessons are not taught 
wearily by book and by dreary homily, but by visible zdc 

818 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

enthtlsing action; and they go straight to the heart, 
which is the lightest of right places for them. Book 
morals often get no further than the intellect, if they 
even get that far on their spectral and shadowy pilgrim- 
age: but when they travel from a Children's Theatre 
they do not stop permanently at that halfway house, but 
go on home. 

The children's theatre is the only teacher of morals and 
conduct and high ideals that never bores the pupil, but 
always leaves him sorry when the lesson is over. And 
as for history, no other teacher is for a moment com- 
parable to it: no other can make the dead heroes of the 
world rise up and shake the dust of the ages from their 
bones and live and move and breathe and speak and be 
real to the looker and listener: no other can make the 
study of the lives and times of the illustrious dead a de- 
light, a splendid interest, a passion; and no other can 
paint a history-lesson in colors that will stay, and stay, 
and never fade. 

It is my conviction that the children's theatre is one 
of the very, very great inventions of the twentieth cen- 
tury; and that its vast educational value — now but dimly 
perceived and but vaguely understood — will presently 
come to be recognized. By the article which I have been 
reading I find the same things happening in the Howl and 
School that we have become familiar with in our Chil- 
dren's Theatre (of which I am President, and sufficiently 
vain of the distinction.) These things among others; 

1. The educating history-study does not stop with the 
little players, but the whole school catches the infection 
and revels in it. 

2. And it doesn't even stop there; the children carry 
it home and infect the family with it — even the parents 
and grandparents ; and the whole household fall to study- 
ing history, and bygone manners and customs and cos- 
tumes with eager interest. And this interest is carried 
along to the studying of costumes in old book-plates; and 
beyond that to the selecting of fabrics and the making of 

819 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



clothes. Hundreds of our children learn the plays by 
listening without book, and by making notes; then the 
listener goes home and plays the piece — all the parts!— 
to the family. And the family are glad and proud; glad 

to listen to the explanations and analyses, elad to leam. 
glad to be lifted to planes above their dreary workaday 
lives. Our children's theatre is educating 7,000 chil- 
dren — and their families. When we put on a play of 
Shakespeare they fall to studying it diligently; so that 
they may be qualified to enjoy it to the limit when the 
piece is staged. 

3. Your Howland School children do the construction- 
work, stage-decorations, etc. That is our way too. Our 
young folks do everything that is needed by the theatre, 
with their own hands; scene-designing, scene-painting, 
gas-fitting, electric work, costume-designing — costume 
making, everything and all things indeed — and their or- 
chestra and its leader are from their own ranks. 

The article which I have been reading, says — speaking 
of the historical play produced by the pupils of the 
Howland School — 

"The question naturally arises, What has this drama 
done for those who so enthusiastically took part? — The 
touching story has made a year out of the Past live for the 1 
children as could no chronology or bald statement of 
historical events; it has cultivated the fancy and given to 
the imagination strength and purity; work in composi- 
tion has ceased to be drudgery, for when all other themes 
fall flat a subject dealing with some aspect of the drama 
presented never fails to arouse interest and a rapid push- 
ing of pens over paper/ ' 

That is entirely true. The interest is not confined to 
the drama's story, it spreads out all around the period d 
the story, and gives to all the outlying and unrelated 
happenings of that period a fascinating interest — ac 
interest which does not fade out with the years, but re- 
mains always fresh, always inspiring, always welcome 
History-facts dug by the job, with sweat and tears out of 

820 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



a dry and spiritless text-book — but never mind, all who 
have suffered know what that is. . . 
I remain, dear madam, 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Mark Twain had a special fondness for cats. As a boy he 
always owned one and it generally had a seat beside him at the 
table. There were cats at Quarry Farm and at Hartford, and 
in the house at Redding there was a gray mother-cat named 
Tammany, of which he was especially fond. Kittens capering 
about were his chief delight. In a letter to a Chicago woman 
he tells how those of Tammany assisted at his favorite game. 

To Mrs. Mabel Larkin Patterson, in Chicago: 

Redding, Connecticut, 
Oct. 2, 'o8. 

Dear Mrs. Patterson, — The contents of your letter 
are very pleasant and very welcome, and I thank you for 
them, sincerely. If I can find a photograph of my 
"Tammany" and her kittens, I will enclose it in this. 
One of them likes to be crammed into a corner-pocket 
of the billiard table— which he fits as snugly as does a 
finger in a glove and then he watches the game (and 
obstructs it) by the hour, and spoils many a shot by 
putting out his paw and changing the direction of a pass- 
ing ball. Whenever a ball is in his arms, or so close to 
him that it cannot be played upon without risk of hurt- 
ing riim, the player is privileged to remove it to anyone of 
the 3 spots that chances to be vacant. 

Ah, no, my lecturing days are over for good and all. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The letter to Howells which follows was written a short time 
before the passage of the copyright extension bill, which rendered 
Mark Twain's new plan, here mentioned, unneeded — at least for 
the time. 

821 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Monday, OcL 26. 'oS. 

Oh, I say! Where are you hiding, and why are you hid- 
ing? You promised to come here and you didn't keep 
your word. (This sounds like astonishment — but don't 
be misled by that.) 

Come, fire up again on your fiction-mill and give us 
another good promise. And this time keep it — for it is 
your turn to be astonished. Come and stay as long as 
you possibly can. I invented a new copyright extension 
scheme last Friday, and sat up all night arranging its 
details. It will interest you. Yesterday I got it down 
on paper in as compact a form as I could. Harvey and I 
have examined the scheme, and to-morrow or next day 
he will send me a couple of copyright-experts to arrange 
about getting certain statistics for me. 

Authors, publishers and the public have always been 
damaged by the copyright laws. The proposed amend- 
ment will advantage all three — the public most of all. 
I think Congress will pass it and settle the vexed question 
permanently. 

I shall need your assent and the assent of about a 
dozen other authors. Also the assent of all the large 
firms of the 300 publishers. These authors and publishers 
will furnish said assent I am sure. Not even the piraus 
will be able to furnish a serious objection, I think. 

Come along. This place seemed at its best when a!', 
around was summer-green; later it seemed at its bo: 
when all around was burning with the autumn splendors; 
and now once more it seems at its best, with the trees 
naked and the ground a painter's palette. 

Yours ever, Mark. 

Clemens was a great admirer of the sea stories of W. W. 
Jacobs and generally kept one or more of this author's volumes 
in reach of his bed, where most of his reading was done. 7 
acknowledgment that follows was sent when he had finished 
Suit haven. 

822 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To W. W. Jacobs, in England: 

Redding, Conn., 
Oct. 28, 'o8. 

Dear Mr. Jacobs, — It has a delightful look. I will not 
venture to say how delightful, because the words would 
sound extravagant, and would thereby lose some of their 
strength and to that degree misrepresent me. It is my 
conviction that Dialstone Lane holds the supremacy over 
all purely humorous books in our language, but I feel 
about Salthaven as the Cape Cod poet feels about Simon 
Hanks: 

"The Lord knows all things, great and small, 
With doubt he's not perplexed: 

Tis Him alone that knows it ail- 
But Simon Hanks comes next." 

The poet was moved by envy and malice and jealousy, 
but I am not: I place Salthaven close up next to Dialstone 
because I think it has a fair and honest right to that high 
position. I have kept the other book moving; I shall 
begin to hand this one around now. 

And many thanks to you for remembering me. 

This house is out in the solitudes of the woods and the 
hills, an hour and a half from New York, and I mean to 
stay in it winter and summer the rest of my days. I beg 
you to come and help occupy it a few days the next time 
you visit the U.S. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

One of the attractions of Stormfield was a beautiful mantel in 
the billiard room, presented by the Hawaiian Promotion Com- 
mittee. It had not arrived when the rest of the house was com- 
pleted, but came in time to be set in place early in the morning 
of the owner's seventy-third birthday. It was made of a variety 
of Hawaiian woods, and was the work of a native carver, F. M. 
Otremba. Clemens was deeply touched by the offering from 
those "western isles"— the memory of which was always so 
sweet to him. 

823 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

To Mr. Wood, in Hawaii: 

Nob. jo, Vrf. 

Dear Mr. Wood,— -The beautiful mantel was put in 
its place an hour ago, and its friendly " Aloha" was the 
first uttered greeting my 73rd birthday received. It is 
rich in color, rich in quality, and rich in decoration, there- 
fore it exactly harmonizes with the taste for such things 
which was born in me and which I have seldom been able 
to indulge to my content. It will be a great pleasure to 
me, daily renewed, to have under my eye this lovely re- 
minder of the loveliest fleet of islands that lies anchored 
in any ocean, and I beg to thank the Committee for 
providing me that pleasure. 

Sincerely Yours, 

S. L. Clemen? 



Digitized by Google 



XLVII 



LETTERS, 1909. TO HOWELLS AND OTHERS. LIPE AT 
STORMPIELD. COPYRIGHT EXTENSION. DEATH 

OP JEAN CLEMENS 

CLEMENS remained at Stormfield all that winter. New 
York was sixty miles away and he did not often care to 
make the journey. He was constantly invited to this or that 
public gathering, or private party, but such affairs had lost in- 
terest for him. He preferred the quiet of his luxurious home 
with its beautiful outlook, while for entertainment he found 
the billiard afternoons sufficient. Guests came from the city, 
now and again, for week-end visits, and if he ever was restless 
or lonely he did not show it. 

Among the invitations that came was one from General O. O. 
Howard asking him to preside at a meeting to raise an endowment 
fund for a Lincoln Memorial University at Cumberland Gap, 
Tennessee. Closing his letter, General Howard said, "Never 
mind if you did fight on the other side." 

To General 0. 0. Howard: 

Stormfield, Redding, Connecticut, 

Jan. 12, 'oq. 

Dear General Howard, — You pay me a most gratify- 
ing compliment in asking me to preside, and it causes me 
very real regret that I am obliged to decline, for the ob- 
ject of the meeting appeals strongly to me, since that 
object is to aid in raising the $500,000 Endowment Fund 
for Lincoln Memorial University. The Endowment 
Fund will be the most fitting of all the memorials the 
country will dedicate to the memory of Lincoln, serving, 
as it will, to uplift his very own people. 

825 



Digitized by Google 








MARK TWAIN'S WRITING IN I908 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



I hope you will meet with complete success, and I am 
sorry I cannot be there to witness it and help you rejoice. 
But I am older than people think, and besides I live away 
out in the country and never stir from home, except at 
geological intervals, to fill left-over engagements in 
mesozoic times when I was younger and indiscreeter. 

You ought not to say sarcastic things about my "fight- 
ing on the other side." General Grant did not act like that. 
General Grant paid me compliments. He bracketed 
me with Zenophon — it is there in his Memoirs for any- 
body to read. He said if all the confederate soldiers had 
followed my example and adopted my military arts he 
could never have caught enough of them in a bunch to 
inconvenience the Rebellion. General Grant was a fair 
man, and recognized my worth; but you are prejudiced, 
and you have hurt my feelings. 

But I have an affection for you, anyway. 

Mark Twain. 

One of Mark Twain's friends was Henniker-Heaton, the 
so-called "Father of Penny Postage M between England and 
America. When, after long years of effort, he succeeded in 
getting the rate established, he at once bent his energies in the 
direction of cheap cable service and a letter from him came one 
day to Stormfield concerning his new plans. This letter hap- 
pened to be over-weight, which gave Mark Twain a chance for 
some amusing exaggerations at his expense. 

To Henniker-Heaton, in London: 

Stormfield, Redding, Connecticut, 

Jan. 18, loog. 

Dear Henniker-Heaton, — I do hope you will succeed 
to your heart's desire in your cheap-cablegram campaign, 
and I feel sure you will. Indeed your cheap-postage vic- 
tory, achieved in spite of a quarter-century of determined 
opposition, is good and rational prophecy that you will. 
Wireless, not being as yet imprisoned in a Chinese wall of 
private cash and high-placed and formidable influence, 

827 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



will come to your aid and make your new campaign 
briefer and easier than the other one was. 

Now then, after uttering my serious word, am I privi- 
leged to be frivolous for a moment? When you shall 
have achieved cheap telegraphy, are you going to employ 
it for just your own selfish profit and other people's pe- 
cuniary damage, the way you are doing with your cheap 
postage? You get letter-postage reduced to 2 cents an 
ounce, then you mail me a 4-ounce letter with a 2 -cent 
stamp on it, and I have to pay the extra freight at this 
end of the line. I return your envelope for inspection. 
Look at it. Stamped in one place is a vast " T," and under 
it the figures "40;" and under those figures appears an 
"L," a sinister and suspicious and mysterious L. In 
another place, stamped within a circle, in offensively large 
capitals, you find the words " DUE 8 CENTS/' Finally, j 
in the midst of a desert space up nor-noreastard from 
that circle you find a figure "3" of quite unnecessarily 
aggressive and insolent magnitude — and done with a bttae 
pencil, so as to be as conspicuous as possible. I inquired 
about these strange signs and symbols of the postman- 
He said they were P. O. Department signals for his in- 
struction. 

"Instruction for what?" 

"To get extra postage." 

"Is it so? Explain. Tell me about the large T and 

the 40. 

"It's short for Take 40 — or as we postmen say, grab 
40. 

"Go on, please, while I think up some words to swear 

with." 

"Due 8 means, grab 8 more." 
" . Continue." 

"The blue-pencil 3 was an afterthought. There 
aren't any stamps for afterthoughts; the sums vary, ac- 
cording to inspiration, and they whirl in the one th*: 
suggests itself at the last moment. Sometimes they 
several times higher than this one. This one only mess 

828 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



hog 3 cents more. And so if you've got 5 1 cents about you, 
or can borrow it — * 

"Tell me: who gets this corruption ?" 

"Half of it goes to the man in England who ships the 
letter on short postage, and the other half goes to the 
P.O.D. to protect cheap postage from inaugurating a 
deficit." 

• 

"I can't blame you; I would say it myself in your 
place, if these ladies were not present. But you see I'm 
only obeying orders, I can't help myself." 

"Oh, I know it; I'm not blaming you. Finally, what 
does that L stand for?" 

"Get the money, or give him L. It's English, you 
know." 

"Take it and go. It's the last cent I've got in the 
world ." 

After seeing the Oxford pageant file by the grand 
stand, picture after picture, splendor after splendor, three 
thousand five hundred strong, the most moving and 
beautiful and impressive and historically-instructive show 
conceivable, you are not to think I would miss the 
London pageant of next year, with its shining host of 
15,000 hostorical English men and women dug from the 
misty books of all the vanished ages and marching in the 
light of the sun — all alive, and looking just as they were 
used to look! Mr. Lascelles spent yesterday here on the 
farm, and told me all about it. I shall be in the middle 
of my 75th year then, and interested in pageants for 
personal and prospective reasons. 

I beg you to give my best thanks to the Bath Club for 
the offer of its hospitalities, but I shall not be able to take 
advantage of it, because I am to be a guest in a private 
house during my stay in London. Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

It was in 1907 that Gemens had seen the Oxford Pageant— 
during the week when he had been awarded his doctor's degree. 
n-25 829 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It gave him the greatest delight, and he fully expected to see the 
next one, planned for ioio. 

In the letter to Howells which follows we get another glimpse 
of Mark Twain's philosophy of man, the irresponsible machine. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Stormfield, Redding, Conn., 

Jan. 18, '09. 

Dear Howells,— I have to write a line, lazy as I am, 
to say how your Poe article delighted me; and to say that 
I am in agreement with substantially all you say about 
his literature. To me his prose is unreadable — like Jane 
Austin's. No, there is a difference. I could read his 
prose on salary, but not Jane's. Jane is entirely im- 
possible. It seems a great pity that they allowed her to 
die a natural death. 

Another thing: you grant that God and circumstances 
sinned against Poe, but you also grant that he sinned 
against himself— a thing which he couldn't do and didn't 
do. 

It is lively up here now. I wish you could come. 

Yrs ever, 

Mark. 

To W. D. Howells, in New York: 

Stormfield, Redding, Connecticut, 
3 in the morning, Apl. 17, 'op. 

[Written with pencil L 

My pen has gone dry and the ink is out of reach. 
Howells, Did you write me day-before-day before yester- 
day, or did I dream it? In my mind's eye I most vividly 
see your hand-write on a square blue envelop in the mail- 
pile. I have hunted the house over, but there is no such 
letter. Was it an illusion ? 

1 am reading Lowell's letter, and smoking. I woke ar. 

hour ago and am reading to keep from wasting the time 

On page 305, vol. I. I have just margined a note: 

"Young friend! I like thai! You ought to see hnx 
now." 

830 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



It seemed startlingly strange to hear a person call 
you young. It was a brick out of a blue sky, and knocked 
me groggy for a moment. Ah me, the pathos of it is, 
that we were young then. And he — why, so was he, but 
he didn't know it. He didn't even know it 9 years later, 
when we saw him approaching and you warned me, 
saying, " Don't say anything about age — he has just 
turned fifty, and thinks he is old and broods over it." 

[Well, Clara did sing! And you wrote her a dear 
letter.] 

Time to go to sleep. Yours ever, Mark. 

To Daniel Kiejer: |No date.) 

Danl Kieper Esq. Dear Sir,— I should be far from 
willing to have a political party named after me. 

I would not be willing to belong to a party which 
allowed its members to have political aspirations or to 
push friends forward for political preferment. 

Yours very truly, 

S. L. Clemens. 

The copyright extension, for which the author had been work- 
ing so long, was granted by Congress in 1009, largely as the 
result of that afternoon in Washington when Mark Twain had 
"received " in 41 Uncle Joe " Cannon's private room, and preached 
the gospel of copyright until the daylight faded and the rest of 
the Capitol grew still. Champ Clark was the last to linger that 
day and they had talked far into the dusk. Clark was powerful, 
and had fathered the bill. Now he wrote to know if it was 
satisfactory. 

To Champ Clark, in Washington: 

Stormfield, Redding, Conn., June 5, 'oq. 
Dear Champ Clark, — Is the new copyright law ac- 
ceptable to me? Emphatically, yes! Clark, it is the 
only sane, and clearly defined, and just and righteous 
copyright law that has ever existed in the United States. 
Whosoever will compare it with its predecessors will 
have no trouble in arriving at that decision. 

831 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The bill which was before the committee two years 
ago when I was down there was the most stupefying 
jumble of conflicting and apparently irreconcilable in- 
terests that was ever seen; and we all said "the case is 
hopeless, absolutely hopeless— -out of this chaos nothing 
can be built. M But we were in error; out of that chaotic 
mass this excellent bill has been constructed; the warring 
interests have been reconciled, and the result is as comely 
and substantial a legislative edifice as lifts its domes and 
towers and protective lightning rods out of the statute 
book, I think. When I think of that other bill, which 
even the Deity couldn't understand, and of this one 
which even I can understand, I take off my hat to the 
man or men who devised this one. Was it R. U. Johnson : 
Was it the Author's League? Was it both together? I 
don't know, but I take off my hat, anyway. Johnson has 
written a valuable article about the new law — I enclose it 

At last — at last and for the first time in copyright 
history — we are ahead of England! Ahead of her in I 
two ways: by length of time and by fairness to all in- 
terests concerned. Does this sound like shouting? Then 
I must modify it: all we possessed of copyright- justice 
before the fourth of last March we owed to England's 
initiative. Truly Yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Because Mark Twain amused himself with certain aspects <x 
Christian Science, and was critical of Mrs. Eddy, there grew up 
a wide impression that he jeered at the theory of mental healirg 
when, as a matter of fact, he was one of its earliest converts, acd 
never lost faith in its power. The letter which follows is ar 
excellent exposition of his attitude toward the institution cc 
Christian Science and the founder of the church in America, 

To J. Wylie Smith, Glasgow, Scotland: 

"Stormfield," August 7, 'pop. 
Dear Sir, — My view of the matter has not changec 
To wit, that Christian Science is valuable; that it has 

832 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



.Digitized by Googh : 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



just the same value now that it had when Mrs. Eddy 
stole it from Quimby; that its healing principle (its most 
valuable asset) possesses the same force now that it 
possessed a million years ago before Quimby was born; 
that Mrs. Eddy. . . organized that force, and is en- 
titled to high credit for that. Then, with a splendid 
sagacity she hitched it to. . . a religion, the surest of 
all ways to secure friends for it, and support. In a fine 
and lofty way — figuratively speaking — it was a tramp 
stealing a ride on the lightning express. Ah, how did 
that ignorant village-born peasant woman know the 
human being so well? She has no more intellect than a 
tadpole — until it comes to business — then she is a marvel ! 

Am I sorry I wrote the book? Most certainly not. 
You say you have 500 (converts) in Glasgow. Fifty 
years from now, your posterity will not count them by 
the hundred, but by the thousand. I feel absolutely 
sure of this. Very truly yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Clemens wrote very little for publication that year, but he 
enjoyed writing for his own amusement, setting down the things 
that boiled, or bubbled, within him: mainly chapters on the 
inconsistencies of human deportment, human superstition and 
human creeds. The " Letters from the Earth " referred to in the 
following, were supposed to have been written by an immortal 
visitant from some far realm to a friend, describing the absurdi- 
ties of mankind. It is true, as he said, that they would not do 
for publication, though certainly the manuscript contains some 
of his most delicious writing. Miss Wallace, to whom the next 
letter is written, had known Mark Twain in Bermuda, and, 
after his death, published a dainty volume entitled Mark Twain 
in the Happy Island. 

11 Stormfeeld," Redding, Connecticut, 

Nov. /j, 'oq. 

Dear Betsy,—. . . . I've been writing "Letters from 
the Earth," and if you will come here and see us I will— 
what? Put the MS in your hands, with the places to 
skip marked? No. I won't trust you quite that far. 1*11 

833 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



read messages to you. This book will never be pub- 
lished—in fact it couldn't be, because it would be 
felony to soil the mails with it, for it has much Holy 
Scripture in it of the kind that . . . can't properly be 
read aloud, except from the pulpit and in family worship. 
Paine enjoys it, but Paine is going to be damned one of 
these days, I suppose. 

The autumn splendors passed you by? What a pity. 
I wish you had been here. It was beyond words ! It was 
heaven and hell and sunset and rainbows and the aurora 
all fused into one divine harmony, and you couldn't look 
at it and keep the tears back. All the hosannahing 
strong gorgeousnesses have gone back to heaven and 
hell and the pole, now, but no matter; if you could look 
out of my bedroom window at this moment, you would 
choke up; and when you got your voice you would say: 
This is not real, this is a dream. Such a singing to- 
gether, and such a whispering together, and such a 
snuggling together of cosy soft colors, and such kissing 
and caressing, and such pretty blushing when the sun 
breaks out and catches those dainty weeds at it — you re- 
member that weed-garden of mine? — and then — then 
the far hills sleeping in a dim blue trance— oh, hearing 
about it is nothing, you should be here to see it. 

Good ! I wish I could go on the platform and read. And 
I could, if it could be kept out of the papers. There's a 
charity-school of 400 young girls in Boston that I would 
give my ears to talk to, if I had some more; but — oh, 
well, I can't go, and it's no use to grieve about it. 

This morning Jean went to town; also Paine; also the 
butler; also Katy; also the laundress. The cook and the 
maid, and the boy and the roustabout and Jean's coach- 
man are left — just enough to make it lonesome, because 
they are around yet never visible. However, the Harpers 
are sending Leigh up to play billiards; therefore I shall 
survive. 




S. L. Clemens. 




834 



Digitized by Googl 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Early in June that year, Clemens had developed unmistakable 
symptoms of heart trouble of a very serious nature. It was 
angina pectoris, and while to all appearances he was as well as 
ever and usually felt so, he was periodically visited by severe 
attacks of acute "breast pains " which, as the months passed, 
increased in frequency and severity. He was alarmed and dis- 
tressed — not on his own account, but because of his daughter 
Jean — a handsome girl, who had long been subject to epileptic 
seizures. In case of his death he feared that Jean would be with- 
out permanent anchorage, his other daughter, Clara — following 
her marriage to Ossip GabrUowitsch in October- — having taken 
up residence abroad. 

This anxiety was soon ended. On the morning of December 
24th, Jean Clemens was found dead in her apartment. She was 
not drowned in her bath, as was reported, but died from heart 
exhaustion, the result of her malady and the shock of cold 
water. 

The blow to her father was terrible, but heavy as it was, one 
may perhaps understand that her passing in that swift, painless 
way must have afforded him a measure of relief. 

To Mrs. Gabrilowitsch, in Europe: 

Redding, Cokn., 

Dec. 2Q t 'og. 

0, Clara, Clara dear, I am so glad she is out of it and 
safe — safe! I am not melancholy; I shall never be melan- 
choly again, I think. You see, I was in such distress 
when I came to realize that you were gone far away 
and no one stood between her and danger but me — and I 
could die at any moment, and then — oh then what would 
become of her! For she was wilful, you know, and would 
not have been governable. 

You can't imagine what a darling she was, that last 
two or three days; and how fine, and good, and sweet, 
and noble — and joyful, thank Heaven! — and how in- 
tellectually brilliant. I had never been acquainted with 
Jean before. I recognized that. 

But I mustn't try to write about her — I carit. I 
have already poured my heart out with the pen, recording 

835 

t 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

that last day or two. I will send you that — and you must 
let no one but Ossip read it. 
Good-bye. I love you so! And Ossip. 

Father 

The writing mentioned in the last paragraph was his article 
The Death of Jean, his last serious writing, and one of the world's 
most beautiful examples of elegiac prose. 1 

l Harptr's Magazine, Dec., 1910, and later in the volume, What 
Is Man? and Other Essays. 




Digitized by Google 1 



XLVIII 



LETTERS OP igiO. LAST TRIP TO BERMUDA. LETTERS TO 

PAINE. THE LAST LETTER 

A/[ ARK TWAIN had returned from a month's trip to Bermuda 



advice, he went back to those balmy islands. He had always 
loved them, since his first trip there with Twichell thirty-three 
years earlier, and at "Bay House," the residence of Vice-Consul 
Allen, where he was always a welcome guest, he could have the 
attentions and care and comforts of a home. Taking Claude, 
the butler, as his valet, he sailed January 5th, and presently 
sent back a letter in which he said, "Again I am leading the 
ideal life, and am immeasurably content." 

By his wish, the present writer and his family were keeping 
the Stormfield house open for him, in order that he might be 
able to return to its comforts at any time. He sent frequent 
letters— one or two by each steamer— but as a rule they did 
not concern matters of general interest. A little after his arrival, 
however, he wrote concerning an incident of his former visit 
— a trivial matter— but one which had annoyed him. I had been 
with him in Bermuda on the earlier visit, and as I remember it, 
there had been some slight oversight on his part in the matter of 
official etiquette— something which doubtless no one had noticed 



Dear Paine,— . . . There was a military lecture last 
night at the Officer's Mess, Prospect, and as the lecturer 
honored me with a special and urgent invitation and said he 
wanted to lecture to me particularly, I being 44 the greatest 
living master of the platform-art," I naturally packed 
Helen and her mother into the provided carriage and went. 




but nimseu. 



To A. B. Paine, in Redding: 



Bay House, Jan. //, iqio. 



837 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

As soon as we landed at the door with the crowd the 
Governor came to me at once and was very cordial, and 
apparently as glad to see me as he said he was. So that 
incident is closed. And pleasantly and entirely satis- 
factorily. Everything is all right, now, and I am no longer 
in a clumsy and awkward situation. 

I "met up" with that charming Colonel Chapman, and 
other officers of the regiment, and had a good time. 

Commandant Peters of the "Carnegie" will dine here 
tonight and arrange a private visit for us to his ship, the 
crowd to be denied access. Sincerely Yours, S. L. C. 

"Helen" of this letter was Mr. and Mrs. Allen's young daugh- 
ter, a favorite companion of his walks and drives. " Loomis " 
and " Lark," mentioned in the letters which follow, were Edward 
E. Loomis — his nephew by marriage — named by Mark Twain 
as one of the trustees of his estate, and Charles T. Lark, Mark 
Twain's attorney. 

To A. B. Paine, in Redding: 

Hamilton, Jan. fx, 7a 
Dear Paine, — Thanks for your letter, and for its 
contenting news of the situation in that foreign and far- 
off and vaguely-remembered country where you and 
Loomis and Lark and other beloved friends are. 

I have a letter from Clara this morning. She is solici- 
tous, and wants me well and watchfully taken care of. 
My, she ought to see Helen and her parents and Claude 
administer that trust! 

Also she says: " I hope to hear from you or Mr. Paine 
very soon." 

I am writing her, and I know you will respond to your 
part of her prayer. She is pretty desolate now, after 
Jean's emancipation — the only kindness God ever did 
that poor unoffending child in all her hard life. 

Ys ever S. L. C. 

Send Clara a copy of Howells's gorgeous letter. 
I want a copy of my article that he is speaking of. 

838 



Digitized by Google 




, W. O. HO WELLS, 130 WEST 67T* STREET 





<4 














THE M GORGEOUS" LETTER FROM W. D. HOWELLS; LINE OF 
COMMENT AT THE TOP BY MARK TWAIN 



Digitized 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



The "gorgeous letter" was concerning Mark Twain's article, 
"The Turning-point in My Life" which had just appeared in one 
of the Harper publications. Howells wrote of it, "While your 
wonderful words are warm in my mind yet, I want to tell you 
what you know already: that you never wrote anything greater, 
finer, than that turning-point paper of yours." 

From the early Bermuda letters we may gather that Mark 
Twain's days were enjoyable enough, and that his malady was 
not giving him serious trouble, thus far. Near the end of Jantz- 
ary he wrote: "Life continues here the same as usual. There 
isn't a flaw in it. Good times, good home, tranquil contentment 
all day and every day, without a break. I shouldn't know how 
to go about bettering my situation." He did little in the way 
of literary work, probably finding neither time nor inclination 
for it. When he wrote at all it was merely to set down some 
fanciful drolleries with no thought of publication. 

To Prof. William Lyon Phelps, Yale College: 

Hamilton, March 12. 

Dear Professor Phelps,— I thank you ever so much 
for the book, 1 which I find charming — so diarming in- 
deed, that I read it through in a single night, and did 
not regret the lost night's sleep. I am glad if I deserve 
what you have said about me: and even if I don't I am 
proud and well contented, since you think I deserve it. 

Yes, I saw Prof. Lounsbury, and had a most pleasant 
time with him. He ought to have staid longer in this 
little paradise— partly for his own sake, but mainly for 
mine. 

I knew my poor Jean had written you. I shall not have 
so dear and sweet a secretary again. 
Good health to you, and all good fortune attend you. 

Sincerely yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

He would appear to have written not many letters besides 
those to Mrs. Gabrilowitsch and to Stormfield, but when a little 

I Professor Phelps's Essays on Modern Novelists. 

840 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



girl sent him a report of a dream, inspired by reading The Prince 
and the Pauper, he took the time and trouble to acknowledge it, 
realizing, no doubt, that a line from him would give the child 
happiness. 

To Miss Sulatnith, in New York: 

"Bay House," Bermuda, March 21, 1910. 
Dear Miss Sulamith, — I think it is a remarkable 
dream for a girl of 13 to have dreamed, in fact for a 
person of any age to have dreamed, because it moves by 
regular grade and sequence from the beginning to the 
end, which is not the habit of dreams. I think your 
report of it is a good piece of work, a clear and effective 
statement of the vision. 

I am glad to know you like the " Prince and the Pauper " 
so well and I believe with you that the dream is good 
evidence of that liking. I think I may say, with your 
sister that I like myself best when I am serious. 

yours, 

S. L. Clemens. 

Through February, and most of March, letters and reports 
from him were about the same. He had begun to plan for his 
return, and concerning amusements at Stormfield for the enter- 
tainment of the neighbors, and for the benefit of the library 
which he had founded soon after his arrival in Redding. In 
these letters he seldom mentioned the angina pains that had 
tortured him earlier. But once, when he sent a small photo- 
graph of himself, it seemed to us that his face had become thin 

and that he had suffered. Certainly his next letter was not 

• 

reassuring. 

To A. B. Paine, in Redding: 

Dbar Paine,— -We must look into the magic-lantern 
business. Maybe the modern lantern is too elaborate 
and troublesome for back-settlement use, but we can 
inquire. We must have some kind of a show at "Storm- 
field" to entertain the countryside with. 

841 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

We are booked to sail in the "Bermudian" April 
23rd, but don't tell anybody, I don't want it known. 
I may have to go sooner if the pain in my breast doesn't 
mend its ways pretty considerably. I don't want to die 
here for this is an unkind place for a person in that con- 
dition. I should have to lie in the undertaker's cellar 
until the ship would remove me and it is dark down there 
and unpleasant. 

The Colliers will meet me on the pier and I may stay 
with them a week or two before going home. It all de- 
pends on the breast pain — I don't want to die there. I 
am growing more and more particular about the place, 

With love, 

S. L. C 

This letter had been written by the hand of his " secretary , w 
Helen Allen: writing had become an effort to him. Yet we did 
not suspect how rapidly the end was approaching and only 
grew vaguely alarmed. A week later, however, it became evi- 
dent that his condition was critical. 

Dear Paine, — . ... I have been having a most un- 
comfortable time for the past 4 days with that breast- 
pain, which turns out to be an affection of the heart, just 
as I originally suspected. The news from New York is to 
the effect that non-bronchial weather has arrived there 
at last, therefore if I can get my breast trouble in travel- 
ing condition I may sail for home a week or two earlier 
than has heretofore been proposed. Yours as ever 

S. L. Clemens, 
(per H. S. A.) 

In this letter he seems to have forgotten that his trouble had 
been pronounced an affection of the heart long before he left 
America, though at first it had been thought that it might be 
gastritis. The same mail brought a letter from Mr. Alkn 
explaining fully the seriousness of his condition. I sailed imme- 
diately for Bermuda, arriving there on the 4th of April. He was 
not suffering at the moment, though the pains came now with 

842 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



alarming frequency and violence. He was cheerful and brave. 
He did not complain. He gave no suggestion of a man whose 
days were nearly ended. 

A part of the Stormfield estate had been a farm, which he had 
given to Jean Clemens, where she had busied herself raising 
some live stock and poultry. After her death he had wished 
the place to be sold and the returns devoted to some memorial 
purpose. The sale had been made during the winter and the 
price received had been paid in cash. I found him full of interest 
in all affairs, and anxious to discuss the memorial plan. A day 
or two later he dictated the following letter— the last he would 
ever send. 

It seemed fitting that this final word from one who had so 
long given happiness to the whole world should record a special 
gift to his neighbors. 

To Charles T. Lark, in New York: 

Hamilton, Bermuda. 

Aprtl 6 % igio. 

Dear Mr. Lark, — I have told Paine that I want the 
money derived from the sale of the farm, which 1 had 
given, but not conveyed, to my daughter Jean, to be used 
to erect a building for the Mark Twain Library of Red- 
ding, the building to be called the Jean L. Clemens 
Memorial Building. 

I wish to place the money $6,000.00 in the hands of 
three trustees, — Paine and two ethers: H. A. Louns- 
bury and William E. Hazen, all of Redding, these trustees 
to form a building Committee to decide on the size and 
plan of the building needed and to arrange for and super- 
vise the work in such a manner that the fund shall amply 
provide for the building complete, with necessary fur- 
nishings, leaving, if possible, a balance remaining, suffi- 
cient for such repairs and additional furnishings as may 
be required for two years from the time of completion. 

Will you please draw a document covering these re- 
quirements and have it ready by the time I reach New 
York (April 14th). Very sincerely, 

S. L. Clemens. 

843 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 

We sailed on the 12th of April, reaching New York on the 
14th, as he had planned. A day or two later, Mr. and Mrs. 
Gabrilowitsch, summoned from Italy by cable, arrived. He 
suffered very little after reaching Stormfieid, and his mind was 
comparatively clear up to the last day. On the afternoon of 
April 21st he sank into a state of coma, and just at sunset he 
died. Three days later, at Elmira, New York, he was laid 
beside Mrs. Clemens and those others who had preceded him. 



Digitized by Google 



THE LAST DAY AT STORMFIELD 



By Bliss Carman. 

At Redding, Connecticut, 
The April sunrise pours 
Over the hardwood ridges 
Softening and greening now 
In the first magic of Spring. 

The wild cherry-trees are in bloom, 
The bloodroot is white underfoot, 
The serene early light flows on, 
Touching with glory the world, 
And flooding the large upper room 
Where a sick man sleeps. 
Slowly he opens his eyes, 
After long weariness, smiles, 
And stretches arms overhead, 
While those about him take heart. 

With his awakening strength, 
(Morning and spring in the air, 
The strong clean scents of earth, 
The call of the golden shaft, 
Ringing across the hills) 
He takes up his heartening book, 
Opens the volume and reads, — 
A page of old rugged Carlyle, 
The dour philosopher 
Who looked askance upon life, 
Lurid, ironical, grim, 
Yet sound at the core. 

845 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



But weariness returns; 

He lays the book aside 
With his glasses upon the bed, 
And gladly sleeps. Sleep, 
Blessed abundant sleep, 
Is all that he needs. 

And when the close of day 

Reddens upon the hills 
And washes the room with rose, 
In the twilight hush 
The Summoner comes to him 
Ever so gently, unseen, 
Touches him on the shoulder; 
And with the departing sun 
Our great funning friend is gone. 

How he has made us laugh! 
A whole generation of men 
Smiled in the joy of his wit. 
But who knows whether he was not 
Like those deep jesters of old 
Who dwelt at the courts of Kings, 
Arthur's, Pendragon's, Lear's, 
Plying the wise fool's trade, 
Making men merry at will, 
Hiding their deeper thoughts 
Under a motley array, — 
Keen -eyed, serious men, 
Watching the sorry world, 
The gaudy pageant of life, 
With pity and wisdom and love? 

Fearless, extravagant, wild, 
His caustic merciless mirth 
Was leveled at pompous shams. 
Doubt not behind that mask 
There dwelt the soul of a man, 

846 



Digitized by Google 



MARK TWAIN'S LETTERS 



Resolute, sorrowing, sage, 
As sure a champion of good 
As ever rode forth to fray. 

Haply — who knows? — somewhere 

In Avalon, Isle of Dreams, 

In vast contentment at last, 

With every grief done away, 

While Chaucer and Shakespeare wait, 

And Moliere hangs on his words, 

And Cervantes not far off 

Listens and smiles apart, 

With that incomparable drawl 

He is jesting with Dagonet now. 

Copyright, tgto. by Collier's Weekly. 



INDEX 



A 

Adam's Diary, 774. 

Adirondack s summer of 1 901 in, 
708-716. 

Agnew, Miss Jay, 808. 

Ah Sin, 292, 208. 

Alden, Henry Mills, 8qcl 

Aldrich, Thomas Bailey , 1 81-184; 
239, 296, 385. 

Alta-California, the, 9, 123; 
Quaker City letters in, 129, 139. 

Amazon trip plans, 33, 35. 

Ament, the printer, 2. 

American Claimant, The, 437; 
serial rights, 548; dramatic 
rights, 562. 

American Publishing Co., offer 
from, 140; contract for Quaker 
City book, 145-148; manu- 
script delivered, 153; Innocents 
Abroad published, 160; letter 
about sales, 169; terms for 
Roughing It, 175; writing in 
Elmira, 187; book a success, 
194; Sketches Old and New, 
260; delay of Tom Sawyer, 
277, 3591 illness of Bliss, 381; 
terms for Tramp Abroad, 388; 
death of Bliss, 389, 579; publi- 
cation of Following tne Equator, 
649. 

Angel s Camp, 6. 

Army experiences, 3, 53. 

Arnot, M. H., 53Q-532, 579. 

A . T. Lacey, the, 39. 

Atlantic Monthly, first contribu- 
tion to, 223; Mississippi chap- 
ters, 229, 239, 266, 270, 283; 
Random Notes, 296; dinner on 
Whittier's 70th birthday, 315; 
breakfast to Holmes, 374. 

Autobiographical chapters, dic- 



tating in Italy, 750, 787; dic- 
tating at Dublin, 795; in North 
American Review, 806. 

B 

Bacheller, Irving, 623. 
Bancroft, H. H., 774. 
Baxter, Sylvester, 519, 701. 
" Becky Thatcher,' *2o. 
Beecher, Henry Ward, 145, 457. 
Bell, Moberly, 806. 
Berlin, 13; winter of 1891 in, 558. 
Bermuda, 18; first visit to, 294; 

feeding the shipwrecked, 310; 

last trip to, 837- 
Bixby, Horace, 3; piloting with, 

35. 4$.. 47. 61, 76, 674-5. 
Bliss, Elisha, Jr. {see American 

Publishing Co.) 
Bliss, Frank E., (see American 

Publishing Co.) 
Boer War, The, 69a. 
Bok, Edward W., 504. 
Boucicault, Dion, 301. 
Bowen, Will, and Sam, 22, 45, 

58, 290, 501. 
Brown, Dr. John, 208, 214, 224, 

280, 420, 359; letter to in 1874, 

218. 

Brown, John, 529. 

Buffalo, N. Y., residence in be- 
gins, 172. 

Buffalo Express, the, 11; own- 
ership, 162, 181, 186. 

Burlingame, Anson, 107, 109, 1 13, 
151- 

Bynner, Witter, 798. 

C 

Cable, George W., 427, 440. 
California Pioneers letter, 163. 



INDEX 



about Orion, 245; with Orion 
in Keokuk, 319; visit to Fre- 
donia, 325 ; her secret romance, 
468. 

Clemens, Jean, 14, 17; illness of 

in 1903, 733: death of, 835. 
Clemens, Tonn Marshall, I. 
Clemens, Margaret, 2. 
Clemens, Olivia Langdon, 10, 
142-144; engagement to Mark 
Twain, 154-156; description in 
letter to mother, 156; marriage, 
172; father's death, 176; ill- 
ness in Buffalo, 185; letter from 
London, 199; resting in Scot- 
land, 207; letter for Ho wells, 
231; letter to Mrs. HowcOs, 
254; visit to Boston in 1875, 
264; letter to on 30th birthday, 
268, 407; letters to in Europe 
in 1 891, 549; improvement in 
health, 570; letter to Hall in 
1893, s&s ; letters to in Europe 
in 1893, 595: letters to in 18^ 
601 ; letters to from Players 
Club in 1894, 6oo/-6i5; on 
world lecture tour, 638: in 
Europe in 1897, 645, 698; ill- 
ness at Riverdale, 728, 73.3 ; a: 
Quarry Farm in 1903, 741 ; 
voyage to Italy, 748; death at 
the Villa Quarto, 757; burial 
at Elmira, 760. 

Witter Bynner, 798; letter to Clemens, On on, a, 4; sale of 



Californian, the, 5, 99. 
Cannon, Joseph, 801. 
Canvassers Tale % The, 285. 
Caprell, Madame, 48. 
Captain Stormfield, 322. 
Carlton, publisher, 123, 276. 
Carman, Bliss, 845. 
Carmen, Sylva, 726. 
Carnegie, Andrew, 578, 789. 
Carnival of Crime, 270-274. 
Carpet-pattern machine, 660. 
Carson City, Nev., 5; "the 

wooden town," 53, 59; official 

life of, 95. 
Castle, Miss, 47. 
Chew letter, 206. 
Children's theater, 818. 
Christ, the Rev. F. V., 813. 
Christian Science, 603, 083, 685, 

689. 83a. 
Christian cy, H. C, 479. 
Cincinnati, 0., as a printer in, 

35. 

Civil War, 3, 53. 

Clark, Champ, 802. 831. 

Clarke, Edward E., 789. 

Clemens, Benjamin, 2. 

Clemens, Clara, impersonations 
by, 597 ; letters to in Paris in 
1894, 608; on world lecture 
tour, 628-30; editing her fath- 
er's correspondence, 733 ; in 
Italy in 1904, 749; poem of 



on Jean's death, 835, 

Clemens, Henry, 2 ; Keokuk let- 
ter to, 34; death on the Penn- 
sylvania, 39. 

Clemens, Jane, promises to his 
mother, 22; keeping troubles 
from her, 42; visit to New Or- 
leans, 46; regarding tobacco, 
48; letter from Carson City, 
53; about their mines, 63; 
about his writing, 91; letters 
to her from San Francisco, 99; 
from Sandwich Islands, 104; 
brotherly relations, 127-128; 
Quaker City letters to, 129; 
about getting married, 156; 
moves to Fredonia, N. Y., 173; 
letter from London, 201; un- 



Journal, 24; in Muscatine, 
29; in Keokuk, 32; regarding 
mother, 42; literary style, 45; 
trip to Carson City, 53 ; mining 
experiences, 67, 83; official life 
at Carson City, 9$; practising 
law, 126; in politics, 149; the 
"Tennessee tract," 166; helps 
with Roughing It, 175; be- 
comes editor of Bliss's paper. 
180; troubles in Keokuk, 224: 
literary efforts, 322; subject 
for a play, 346-357, 361-363; 
autobiography and type-set tint 
machihe, 378, 434; letter to 00 
economy, 502 ; on completion 
of type-setting machine, 
family letter of 1892, <66» 



happiness at Fredonia, 220; Clemens, Pamela, 2; lev.cr _ 

850 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX 



1853, 91 ; letter from New 
York, 23; letter from Carson 
City, 59; her children, 325; 

494j 519. . . _ 

Qemens, Susy, 14; birth of, 219, 
225, 251 ; her shoes, 281 ; learn- 
ing German, 329; her dreams, 
342; letter to from Europe in 
1892, 563; death of, 634; let- 
ter to Twichell about, 640. 

Cleveland, Grover, 762. 

Cleveland, Mrs. Grover, 4QI. 

Cleveland, 0., interest in news- 

rper, 161. 
Chambers, the, 44. 
Concord Centennial, 252. 
Connecticut Yankee in King Ar- 
thur's Court, work on 500: il- 
lustrations for, gio; cool recep- 
tion in England, 524. 
Copyright, 260, 288; Canadian 
pirates, 380, 417; Life on Mis- 
sissippi in Canada, 431 : un- 
mailed letter to Christiancy on 

gracy, 479; Roughing It in 
rig land, 493, 731, 801: letter 
to Ho wells on, 821. 831. 
Corbett, Tames J., 603. 
Crane, Mrs. Theodore, 567-573, 
777. 

Crane, Theodore, death of, 509. 
Creel, Ella, 23, 34; in New Or- 
leans, 47. 
Crystal Palace Exposition, 20. 
Czar, the, letter to, 535. 



Daly, Augustin, 562. 
Davis, Richard Harding, 597, 
610. 

Defense of Harriet Shelley, 500, 
810, 

Degrees from Universities, 15. 
Dickinson, Anna, 278-280. 
Dimmitt, Edward L., 708. 
Dodge, Mary Mapes, 577, 608. 
Doublcday, Frank N., 701, 746, 
760, 

Downing, Major Jack, 674. 
Dublin, N. H., summer of 1905 

at, 772; description of, 782, 

795- 

85 



Duneka, Frederick A., letter to 
about Adam's Diary, 775; 
about A Horse's Tale, 778. 

E 

* 

Early Letters, 20. 

Elmira, N. Y., 12, 14; Mark 
Twain's marriage at, 172; 
home at Quarry Farm, 186; 
stay in 1874, 217; the new 
study, 219; summer of 1876 
on farm, 281; working on 
Mississippi book, 443; letters 
of 1887, 488; letter to T. W. 
Crane, 500; lecture at reforma- 
tory, 627. 

Empress of Austria, assassination 
of, 666. 

Enterprise, the {see Virginia City 
Enterprise), 

"Esmeralda," 58, 591 the "Black 
Warrior," 60, 64, 66, 68; the 
cheerless camp, 70; better luck, 
73: the "Wide West," 79; the 
u Enterprise Letters," 81 ; Cali- 
fornia Pioneers letter, 163. 



Fields, James, T., 102, 602. 
Fiske, Mrs. Minnie Maddern, 
777- 

Fitz-Simon, Father, 8i_l. 

Florida, Mo., birthplace of Mark 
Twain, I. 

Following the Equator, 15; writing 
of in London, 640; publica- 
tion of , 649, 694. 

Forrest, EdwinTTn "The Gladi- 
ator," 24. 

Francis, Governor Daniel R., 756 

Frisbie, T. S., photograph of 
Mark Twain, 648. 

Fulton, Robert, 772. 



Galaxy, the, 11, 173, 185. 
Garfield, James A., 393. 
Gatts, T. F., 739. 
Gerhard t, Karl, 396, 443. 
Germany, trip to in 1878, 328. 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX 



754 i 
Airs. 



Gilded Age, The, I, 12; writing 
with Warner, 203; publication 
of, 212; share in writing, 214; 
dramatizing of, 219, 223, 228; 
play royalties, 251. 

Gilder, Jeannette, 465, 486. 

Gilder, Richard Watson, 
letter to on death of 
Clemens, 758. 

Gillis, James, 6, 170. 

Gillis, Steve, 98, 99, 171. 

Glyn, Mrs. Elinor, 809. 

Golden Era, the, 5, 100. 

Goodman, Joseph T., 4, 82, 87, Holmes, 
93t *87. £15. 5215 letters to on 
type-setting machine, 529~539i 

„ 545- 721- . 
Gorky, Maxim, 794. 



tainment committee, 113; giv- 
ing up house in, 547; letter 00 
return to, 701 ; sale of boose 
at, 740. 

Harvey, Col. George, 776; 70th- 

birthday dinner, 786. 
Hawaii (see Sandwich Islands). 
Hay, John, 237, 762^ 
Hayes, Rutherford B., 293. 
Henniker-Heaton, 827. 
Higbie, Calvin H., 68, 82, 84. 
Higginson, Col. Thomas Went- 
worth, 771, 782. 

Oliver Wendell, 159; 
meets Mark Twain, 166, 315, 
318; letter to on 5oth-birthday 
poem, 466, 602; reading poem 
of in Sandwich Islands, 732. 
Hornet disaster, 113. . 
Horse's Tale, A, 778. 



Grant, Fred D., 790. 
Grant, Gen. U. S., 13; reunion 

in Chicago, 363, 391 ; dictating Howard, Gen. O. O.. 825. 
Memoirs, 455; letter to Beecher Howells, William Dean, 
on drinking, 457; publication 
of Memoirs of 463-465; royalty 
payments, 467. 
Gray, John A., 23. 



H 

Hall, Fred J., 54Zi $59. 5^ 564; 
Webster difficulties, 576, $83; 
selling Library of American 
Literature, 587. 

Hannibal Journal, the, 2, 20; 
sale of, 25. 

Hannibal, Mo., 2, 4, 123. 

Harper* s Magazine, 8; publica- 
tion of Joan of Arc, 14, 65, 120, 
5*3, 545i 627, 631; Austrian 
article in, 653, 666, 675; publi- 
cation of Mysterious Stranger, 

681, 748, 778, 800. 84Q« 
Hams, Joel Chandler, 401, 416. 
Harte, Bret, 5, 09, 102, 124; 
Heathen Chinee letters to Aid- 
rich, 181 ; in Boston, 192; maga- 
zine prices, 258, 287; troubles 
collaboration, 292. 
Hartford, Conn., begins seven- 
teen-year residence at, 1 1 j final 
leave-taking, 13; removal of 
family to, 192; Monday Eve- 
ning Club, 270; letter to enter- 

852 



meets 

Mark Twain, 166; first letter 
to, 194; letter to about lectur- 
ing, 203; letter to on Fort- 
gone Conclusions, 222, 227, 
229-243 ; letters to on literature 
and politics, 270-291 ; Bermuda 
and playwriting letters, 294- 
311; after Twain's arrival in 
Europe in 1878, 328; from 
Europe in 1878, 340; regarding 
Orion Clemens in a play, 352, 
36 1 -363 ; A tlantic breakfast, 
374.; letters of 1 880, 37$; 
r * Modest Club," 379; at Bel- 
mont in 1880, 380; about 
Prince and Pauper, 390, 406; 
Canadian trip, 410; Silas 
Lap ham, 421; letters to in 
Europe in 1882, 424; collabora- 
tion on "Ormc's Motor/* 425, 
428; "learning history M game, 
436; political letters of 1884, 
443; family matters, 467; a:^- 
proval of Yankee at King, Ar- 
thur's Court, 513, 522; about 
Sellers play, 541, 642; letter 
to from Vienna in 1898, 6m; 
letters to from Europe in 1 89Q. 
675; advice to on lecturing, 
8K 75' ; letter to on Mrs. 
Clemcns's death, 757, 759; 



jd by Google 



INDEX 



letters to from Dublin in 1906, Langdon, Charles, 251, 308. 



795, 816; on copyright, 821, 

Mo. 

Howland, Bob, 68. 
Huckleberry Finn, 281-283; writ- 
ing the story, 300; writing at 

Elmira, 4^ 44Pj 44£i Iar g e 
sales, 452; excluded from li- 
braries, 8Qfi. 

Humboldt mining camp, 66. 

Hut ton, Lawrence, 639. 



Ingersoll, Robert J., 371; letter 
t°t 373; letter on death of, 
682, 

Innocents Abroad, 10, 129; offer 
for, 140; contract for, 145- 
1 48 ; manuscript delivered, 1 53 ; 
reading proofs, 157; published, 
160. 

Irving, Henry, 598, 618, 620. 



Jackass Hill, 6. 
Jacobs, W. W., 823. 
Joan of Arc, 13; writing of in 

Europe in 1892, 579; writing 

of second part in 1894, 615; 

finishing of, 624; introduction 

to, 686, 
Jumping Frog, The, J, 101. 



Lark, Charles T., 843. 
Lecturing, at his old home, 8; 
first in the East, 9, 10; in Eng- 
land, 11; with Cable, 14; on 
Hawaiian life, 120; first in 
New York, 123-125; Frozen 
Truth, 143; in Washington, 
144; in Cleveland, 155; love 
for lecturing, 157-158; letter 
renouncing it, 172; new Red- 
path lecture, 189; the Roughing 
It tour, 193; in London in 
1873, 208, 262; proposal to 
Nast, 311; with Cable, A47; 
world reading-tour plans, 625; 
at Cleveland, 627 ; in Australia, 
629; in South Africa, 631 ; for 
charity in Vienna, 657 ; advice 
to Howells on, 684; Fulton 
monument farewell, 790. 
Lewis, John T., 304. 
Lexington Centennial, 252. 
Library of American Humor, 423, 

,448. 453, 462, 484. 
Library of American Literature, 



545, 5Z2i 554, 587. 

Mississippi, \, 42, 229; 

for, 



249; 




ood s 



Life on the 
Atlantic payment 
writing at Elmira, 42 
in manuscript, 425; in 
hands, 428. 
Loan of a Lover, The, 275. 
Locke, Daniel R., 166. 
London, Mark Twain's visit in 
K 1872, 199; winter of 1896 at 

Tedworth Square, 635; close 
Keller, Helen, 637: letter to on of residence in, 699. 

her book, 730. 8q2, London Times, the, letter to on 

Kellgren, Heinrick, 683, 689. the mails, 698, 806. 

Keokuk, Iowa, 3; with brother Longfellow, Henry W., 315. 
Orion, 32-34. 

Kiefer, Daniel, 83 1. \f 
Kinney, John D., 57. 

Kipling, Rudyard, 12; Mark MacAlister, J. Y. M., 700, 734. 
Twain's traveling companion, Mackav, John, 597, 614. 
601 ; letter to in 1895, 629, 746. Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg, 

The, 17. 

L " Margaret M , letter from, 

745- 

Lampton, James, "Col. Sellers," Mark Twain, first use of name, 

I*. 62. 5, 87. 

Lang, Andrew, 52^ 8 10. Matthews, Brander, 666, 699- 

853 




id by Google 



INDEX 



letter to on Sir Walter Scotl. P 

McKelway, St. Clair, 771. v^^k* . 

McKinley, President.nkter on ^rwuS ' 8?9 * 359 * 

assassination of 7i \ 762 Parsloe, Charles T., 292. 

McQuiston, Mrs. Om^jri. Pat ^n, Mrs. Mabel Larkin,^!. 

Mergenthaler Composing Ma- 1 " » ?5; 

chine «i-s^ Pendleton, Louis, letter to. 497- 

Merwin', Samuel' 742, Penns^vama,^ adventures on, 

Millet, Frank, 304^" d ^™ ctlon T of . 39- 

M Lta g ''r~ (5 " <4Esraer - ^SK 3 ^^ 5 ^ 

M Modest Club, The," 379. J^p ^""i- 26 -*. 

Moffett, Annie 69, 325 &5N&%9! **' 7 *' 74 * 77 * 

Moffett Mrs. ^see Clemens, ^ 1SS Helene ; K . 

Pamela). Piloting, learning wiUTBixby, 35. 

Moore, J. Howard, 804, V\ his luck, ±3 47; no more 

278 Downing, 496. 

Muscatine, Iowa, visit to in $/£^&P^.'J^ . 
18S4 Players Club, residence of Mark 

MusSi "notation letter, 4^ p^T.^V 5 ?^^^. 




7"if . be- 

ginning of story. 376; writing 
" at farm, 385; sent to HowcOs, 

Nast, Thomas, 125, »o», 311. %**L P !Y' E" 

Liun, 73y. 8l8 

Orleans Crescent, the, 82. p?!ijV«h*«A ur;u~. 

New Orleans, La., visit with P ^ n ^:«!T S? 

mother, 46; French restaur g£ e ^ tm ^^ • n& ^ n « * 

rants a8- oian of trio to with « ^ 5 7 9: ch* 11 ^ in . 59©= 

Mrt© York Herald, 135, 139, 145. 

Mrw Korfc Tribune, the, 9; U 

<?KO**r Ct/y letters 129, 139, ^ferr Ctfy, the, 9. «3; the 

202; cnticism of his books, 413. voyage 129-138 

Nordica, Madame, 608. Quarry Farm {see Elmira). 

North American Review, 806. 

Norton, Charles Elliot, 316. ^ 

O Redpath, James (see Lecturing). 

Reid, Robert, 765. 

Osgood, James, becomes Mark Reid, Whitelaw, 411. 

Twain's publisher, 407, 409, Rest-and-be- Thankful (see El- 
418, 42^ 448. 453- mira). 

Overland^oWtly, 183-184. Rice, the " Unreliable/' 89-90. 

Oxford University, degree at, 860. Riverdale-on- the- Hudson, 71 6- 

854 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX 



722; illness of Mrs. Clemens 
at, 728; hard days at, 730. 

Robinson, Henry C, letter on 
death of, 696, 698. 

Rogers, Henry H., meets Mark 
Twain, .sq.s ; trip to Chicago, 
598; Webster affairs, 61 1 ; let- 
ters to from Europe in 1894, 
615: letters of 1895-96, 621; 
letters to regarding Webster 
debts, 653; aoout carpet -pat- 
tern machine, 660; Helen Keller 
letter, 730, 8oiL 

Rogers, Mrs. Henry H., 799, 815. 

Rome, visit to in 1878, 339. 

Roosevelt, Theodore, 762, 766, 

Roughing It, 4, 8, 1 1, 83. 120, 
127; biggest copyright" and 
material, 174; published, 194. 



Sacramento Union, the, 82, 103, 
109. 

Saint Joan of Arc, 686. 

Salt River, 1. 

"Sam Clemens Bay," 60. 

Sandwich Islands, 8, 102, tig. 

San Francisco, trip with Rice, 
90; with Gillis, 98. 

San Francisco Call, the, 5; begins 
work on, 08. 

Scott, Sir Walter, 737* 

Scrap-book, invention of, 196. 

Sellers, Colonel Mulberry, 12, 62. 

Simon Wheeler, Amateur Detec- 
tive, 297, 301, 345. 

Sketches Old and New, 260. 

Slote, Dan, 126, 152, 197. 

Smith, T. Wylie, 832. 

Smith, Mrs. Elizabeth W., 44. 

Soule, Frank, 368, 386. 

Stanley, Lady Henry, 752. 

Stead, William T., peace letter 
to, 672. 

Stedman, Edmund Clarence, 512. 
Stewart, William M., 140, 151. 
Stillwater Tragedy, The, 385. 
St. Louis, Mo., visit to in 1851, 

31 ; proposed moving of capital, 

160. 

Stoddard, Charles Warren, 210, 
248, 404. 



Stoker, Bram, 59 
"Stonnfieldy.'. 1 




843; poem on by Bliss Carmen, 
Sweden, summer of 1899 in, 683. 



Taylor, Bavard, 325, 328. 
Tennessee inheritance, 38, 166, 
176. 

Territorial Enterprise, the (see 
Virginia City Enterprise). 

"Third House, The," 95. 

Ticknor, George, diary of, 303. 

"To Mary in H— 1," 28. 

Tom Sawyer, 2; book planned, 
196; writing begun, 210, 223; 
completed, 258; Ho wells s opin- 
ion of, 260; delay in publica- 
tion, 277; destroyed manu- 
script of play, ^39; un mailed 
letter to theatrical manager, 
476; excluded from libraries, 
805. 

Tom Sawyer Abroad, conception 
of story, 565 ; writing in Europe, 
56L 

Tom Sawyer, Detective, 623. 

Tower, Charlemagne, 679. 

Tramp Abroad, A, 332-337. 359" 
361; writing in Hartford, 375; 
on press, 376. 

Twichell, the Rev. Joseph H. 13, 
177; the Chew story, 206, 219, 
253; with Twain in Bermuda, 
294; sermon on poor, 314; in 
Ciermany with Twain, 332, 
347; on sharpening razors, 357; 
Chinese Mission, 391; his ab- 
sent-mindedness, 509, S58. 585. 
629; letter to on Susy s death, 
635; letters to from Europe in 
1 897, 645; letter to on " Swedish 
Movement," 683; on osteop- 
athy, 689, 694, 696, 699; letters 

to m 1901, ZQ3i Z4ii 74»i 759, 
766. 

Type-setting machine, 12; first 
interest in, 376; heavy expens- 
es, 440, 494, 499; first operation 
of, 506, 514, 521; letters to 



855 



INDEX 



Goodman about, 53Q-539, 589. 
596, 621* 
Typewriter, attempt to use, 238, 
256. 



Vail, Theodore, N., 404. 

Van Valkenburgh, General, 107. 

Vienna, winter of 1897 in, 646. 

Virginia City Enterprise, the, 4, 
81, 82, 87; the ''Unreliable, ' 
89. 91 » 93; the duel, 97, 101. 

W 

Walker, John Brisben, and Cos- 
mopolitan Magazine, 579, 589, 
685, 687. 

Ward, Artemus, 7; letters to 
Mark Twain, 93~95, 173. 

Warner, Charles Dudley, 12, 
203-205, 214, 227, 267, 395, 
582, 663. 

Washington, refuses political 
office, 148; proposed moving of 
capital, 160; copyright delega- 
tion at, 801. 

Webb, Charles Henry, 123. 



Webster & Co., Charles L., I J, 
325, 440, 449; publication ot 
Grant s Memoirs, 464, 489, 511, 

547, 559: losses 0^ 575- tfL 
583 ; difficulties of in 1895, 
580-595; assignment of, 612- 
613; world tour to pay debts 
of, 625-628; payment of debts 
of, <SL 

Webster, Mrs. Charles L. (set 
Moffett, Annie). 

Webster, Daniel, private cor- 
respondence, 384. 

Western Union Co., letter to, -22. 

What is Man? 704, 813. 

White, Stanford. 604. 

White, William Allen, 797. 

Whitmore, Mrs. F. G., 805. 

Whittier, John Greenleaf, 315. 

Wilberforce, Canon, 682. 686. 

Wolfe, Jim, 23. 



Yale University, degree at in 

1888 495- 
York Harbor, Maine, summer 

with H 1 .wells at, 72a. 
Yung Wing, 710. 



THE END 



Digitized by Google 



(czflcmc 
Boo 1 ^ ^Co.. Inc. 
300 Sumn.cf Sire t 
Boston, Mass. 02210 



Digitized by Google 




THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
! BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 021 38 (61 7) 495-241 3 




Digitized by Google 



