MARK TWAIN 


AND 


FAIRHAVEN 


ISSUED BY 
THE MILLICENT LIBRARY 


MASS. 


FAIRHAVEN, 


SECOND EDITION 1926 


FIRST EDITION 1913 


ee 


On the South wall of the reading room of The Milli- 
cent Library are two framed autographs—a manuscript 
speech and a letter addressed ‘“To the Officers of The Milli- 
cent Library’’—both from the pen of Samuel L. Clemens, or 
to use the name by which he is best known and loved, 


Mark Twain. 


Mr. Henry H. Rogers probably never had a more de- 
voted or loyal friend than Mark Twain. The story of that 
friendship lasting for twenty years until Mr. Rogers’s death 
in 1909 is told in the admirable biography of Mr. Clemens 
by his secretary Albert Bigelow Paine. In all Mr. Rogers’s 
plans for the beautifying and the betterment of his native 
town of Fairhaven, Mark Twain had a deep interest and 
appreciation. 


On February twenty-second, eighteen hundred ninety- 
four, as the guest of Mr. Rogers and the people of Fairhaven, 
he attended the dedication of the new Town Hall and de- 
livered the speech which is printed on the following pages. 
A visit to the Library on the same occasion inspired him to 
write the sentiments expressed in the letter to its trustees. 


i 
eis 


4 MARK TWAIN’S SPEECH 


ADVICE. 


Furnished at the Dedication of the Town Hall, Fair- 
haven, Feb. 22, 1894. 


By a thoughtful and judicious allotment of the privi- 
leges of this occasion, each speaker has been appointed to 
the function best suited to his capacity, his character, and 
his credit in the community. Chief of all the speakers, and 
the most eloquent, stands the building itself. It is its easy 
office to declare to you the love of its builder for the town 
which was her birthplace and the home of her girlhood. It 
may be trusted to say its say well; and be understood; and 
be applauded from the heart; and to occupy the platform 
longer than anybody else, and make the only speech that 
will be printed right in the papers. Yes, and it is the only 
speaker of us all, gifted and popular as we try to let on to 
be, that can dare to stand up here and undertake to hold 
your unfatigued attention for a hundred years. Why, we 
couldn’t do it for forty. 


We all recognize the value of this building as an exam- 
ple and a suggestion—a suggestion to any who are moved 
by love of their fellowmen to make gifts to them of hospi- 
tals or town halls or libraries, to build these things while 
they are alive, not wait till they are dead. If you do it 
while you are alive, it is really done, and well done; but if 
you wait till you are dead there is but a barren result and a 
divided profit; you get credit for the :ztention and the law- 
yers get the money. The stomachs of the lawyers of this 
land are distended to utter discomfort with the elemosinary 
architecture that they have swallowed. In all this world 
there is no joy like the joy a lawyer feels when he sees a 
good hearted inconsiderate person erecting a free library or 
a town hall or a hospital in his will. He smiles the smile 
that only he knows how to smile, and goes into training 
for the anaconda act. Perhaps no one has ever known a 


MARK TWAIN’S SPEECH 5 


dead man to try to do even the least little simple thing 
without making a botch of it. The truth is, a dead man 
ought to lie still, and keep quiet and try to behave. But 
you can’t teach him that; you can’t teach him any useful 
thing. Everything about him is perishable but one thing, 
and that is his inability to accept the fact that circumstances 
over which he has no control have limited his activities. 
And first and last and all the time it is impossible to make 


him understand that there is nothing very large or fine or 


generous in spending his own money on himself and build- 
ing hospitals with his children’s cash. Why, some people 
do seem to get duller and duller the deader they get. Oh, 
well, perhaps it’s no matter; it is the way they are made. 
Perhaps the mistake was in making them at all. I mean, 
if it was a mistake; I am no judge of that—but I wouldn’t 
leave it to them. 


It was a pleasant and patriotic thought to dedicate this 
building and confirm this grace to Fairhaven on the natal 
day of Washington—George Washington, first of Ameri- 
cans—George Washington, the Father of his Country— 
George Washington, the Father of Those Who Cannot 
Lie. The family has dwindled a good deal. But I am left 
yet; and when I look back over the waste of years and call 
up the faces of the others, and know that I shall see them 
no more in this life and that I must remain now solitary 
and forlornly conspicuous to the last. the sole remnant of 
that old noble stock, it makes me feel sad, sad, and oh, so 
lonesome. 


What I owe to Washington no words of mine can tell. 
He was my model from my cradle up. All that 1 am,— 
morally speaking—I owe to his example. Even in my ten- 
derest youth his spirit was ever near, to guide and succor 
me. The first time I ever stole a watermelon in my life— 
I think it was the first time—it was the thought of Wash- 
ington that moved me to make restitution, restored me to 


6 MARK TWAIN’S SPEECH 


the path of rectitude, made me morally whole again. 
When I found out it was a green watermelon, I was sorry; 
not superficially, but deeply and honestly sorry. Then 
came the thought of Washington, and I said to myself, 
“‘What would Washington do?’’ That is what I said to 
myself. ‘‘What would George Washington do if he had 
stolen a watermelon? Green one. He would make res- 
titution—that is what he would do.’’ And that is what I 
did. I rose up spiritually refreshed and strong, and carried 
the melon back to the farmer’s wagon and restored it 
to him; and said the merit was not mine, but Washington’s. 
And then I felt that inspiriting something, that electric thrill, 
that exaltation which rewards duty done, a moral victory 
won, a moral heroism added to one’s stock of dear and pre- 
cious memories; and I told the farmer he ought to be 
ashamed of himself, going around working off green water- 
melons on people that had confidence in him; and made 
him give me aripe one for it. And he was ashamed, and 
said he wouldn't ever do it again. SoI forgave him. For 
when a person has done wrong and acknowledges it and is 
ashamed of it, that is enough for me. It was Washington 
that saved me that time; he has been my guardian angel 
ever since—and has had an active career. I am glad and 
proud to have an opportunity at last to help celebrate his 
memory and to do honor to his noble name. 


In the distribution of the privileges of this platform I 
was appointed to temper the glare of the gay and thought- 
less oratory of these others with the wholesome shadow of 
a few words of sober advice—for there is a time for such 
things, and it is meet that we recognize this truth and rest 
our spirits with intervals of seriousness and solemnity. And 
so my advice to you——yea, more, my supplication—is, that 
you live as Washington lived—live as I have lived—and 
build your gift-halls and hospitals while you still live and 
can build your heart as well as your money into your gift. 


MARK TWAIN’S LETTER 


MARK TWAIN’S LETTER 
TO THE MILLICENT LIBRARY 


Fairhaven, Feb. 22, 1894. 


To the Officers of the Millicent Library: 


Iam glad to have seen it. It is the ideal library, I 
think. Books are the liberated spirits of men, and should 
be bestowed in a heaven of light and grace and harmonious 
color and sumptuous comfort, like this, instead of in the cus- 
tomary kind of public library, with its depressing austerities 
and severities of form and furniture and decoration. A 
public library is the most enduring of memorials, the trus- 
tiest monument for the preservation of an event or a name 
or an affection; for it, and it only, is respected by wars and 
revolutions, and survives them. Creed and opinion change 
with time, and their symbols perish; but Literature and its 
temples are sacred to all creeds, and inviolate. All other 
things which I have seen to-day must past away and be for- 
gotten; but there will still be a Millicent Library when by 
the mutations of language the books that are in it now will 
speak in a lost tongue to your posterity. 


Truly yours, 


MARK TWAIN. 


8 MILLICENT LIBRARY 


THE MILLICENT LIBRARY 


was founded and given to the Town of Fairhaven by Mrs. 
William E. Benjamin, Mrs. Cara L. Broughton, Mrs. 
Mary H. Coe, and Henry H. Rogers, Jr., children of Henry 
Huttleston and Abbie P. Rogers, as a memorial to their sis- 
ter, Millicent Gifford Rogers, who died August 31, 1890, 
at the age of eighteen years. 


The building was finished and ready for occupancy on 
January 30, 1893, on which day dedicatory exercises were 
held. Addresses were given by the Rev. James M. Leigh- 
ton, Mr. Henry H. Rogers, Mr. George H. Tripp, and the 
Rey. Robert Collyer. 


The Library building is constructed of granite, with 
terra cotta decorations; the style is that of the Italian re- 
naissance. The architect was Charles Brigham of Boston. 
A feature of the interior is the memorial window which 
fills the outer wall of the entrance hall. It is the work of 
a celebrated firm, Clayton & Bell, of London, England. 
The figure in the central compartment is that of the Muse 
of Poetry, and the features portray the likeness of her in 
whose memory the building was erected. The upper figure 
is that of Shakespeare. Other interesting features of the 
library are the Japanese Samurai sword, on view in the 
trustees’ room, and the autograph letters of the presidents 
and of other famous Americans that are hung about the 
reading room. 


The Library contains (1926) 31,293 books, and enjoys 
an exceptionally large circulation in proportion to the pop- 
ulation of the town. It is open every day in the year, and 
is free to residents of Fairhaven and to other persons on the 
recommendation of the librarian or of a trustee of the library. 


a 


