Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often diflicult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parlies, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the plus We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a b<x>k is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means il can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's hooks while helping authors ami publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull text of this book on I lie web 
at |http : //books . qooqle . com/| 



mmmmm 







.MINNA C. YOl'.M; 



•<£« 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 



Ng 



I 




W. A. ROGERS 

l'rora a Droning by Joseph St. i 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 



c/4* c R$cord of Auld Acquaintance 






W. A. ROGERS 



With IUustratum 
by tht a/futhor 




HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 
cMCMXXIJ 



139 
A3 



A Wobld Womb Wblb 



Copyright, 1922. by Harper & Brother! 
Printed in the United Statet of America 



jut^ceu. 










LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

W. A. Rogers (from a drawing by Joseph St. 

Amand) » Fwititoptoce 

The First Telephone Facing pags 8 

Alexander Graham Bell's Experimental Room in 

Boston * 16 

A Wizard's Black Art in Salem « 30 

Gray Parker (from a sketch made in the '70s) " 48 

The 'Daily Graphic" Room at Mouquin's M 48 

From a Sketch Made at President Garfield's Bed- 
side u 60 

Trying to Lower the White House Temperature. M 82 

He Didn't Like the Road-bed " 100 

Jim Saves the Mail " 120 

Fort Garry, Manitoba, in 1878 M 186 

Will Carey (by a S. Reinhart) u ISO 

A Few Attempts to Penetrate a Great Mask. . . M 150 

The First Spadeful u 164 

A Cartoon Which Killed a Bad Bill at Albany. . M 192 

Looking Over the Candidate " 218 

Explaining Much M 280 

The Mountain People " 260 

Young Abbey and His Mentor, Charles Parsons, 

in Franklin Square * 260 

A Little Model Who Posed for "Toby Tyler"... « 298 

Hungry Gulch •••••• " 298 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 



INTRODUCTION 

A little while ago (perhaps it may have been 
early in the 'eighties) the boy that I knew best 
read "Toby Tyler" and "Mr. Stubbs's Brother" in 
Harper's Young People with a great deal of happi- 
ness, and made a most influential acquaintance 
thereby. This acquaintance was not one personally 
and in the flesh, so to speak, and yet the boy cer- 
tainly felt that he knew W. A. Rogers pretty well. 

W. A. Rogers was the name signed to the illustra- 
tions accompanying those delightful stories, and the 
boy liked the pictures so much that he tried to draw 
other pictures in the manner of W. A. Rogers, and 
began to believe that nothing could content him but 
to become an illustrator, and in general about such 
a man as this W. A. Rogers surely must be. For the 
illustrations of W. A. Rogers seemed to tell a great 
deal about the man that made them: they had that 
quality. They seemed to understand the people 
they exhibited and to understand these people in 
the friendliest and most humorous way. They were 
clear pictures, too, and there was no affectation 
about them, no pretense; the drawing was as honest 
as George Washington. So the boy, studying the 
pictures, thought that W. A. Rogers must be a 
pretty fine man, and a pretty capable man; a man 
with a humorous, friendly outlook, a man as kind 



INTRODUCTION 

and sunny as he was keen — that is to say, a pretty 
remarkable man all round. 

The other boys of that generation felt the same 
way about W. A. Rogers, and as they grew older 
the sight of one of his pictures would always bring 
the look into their eyes that we have when we come 
upon an old friend. The boy I mentioned in par- 
ticular failed to become an illustrator, however; he 
could never quite get the "know-how" of it; but 
although he had to give up that ambition, he never 
saw a picture drawn by W. A. Rogers without think- 
ing of what an interesting and charming man stood 
behind the pictures — a man who seemed to know 
pretty much everything that was going on, and to 
know the people, too, who made the things go on. 

Finally, the boy-admirer read this book and 
discovered that all boys of his generation have been 
exactly right in what they have been thinking of 
W. A. Rogers for the last forty years. 

Booth Tarkington. 

Indianapolis, February, 198&. 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 








•f MmMWfMHHI 







•••■ ^^^^^^w^^P^JJl 1 



^ 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 



CHAPTER I 

CHINESE scholars, I am told by a medical 
friend who practiced bis profession in the 
Orient, have recourse to a drug which sets a 
keen edge on the faculty of memory. By its aid they 
are enabled to recall the most minute details of long- 
past events and of long-forgotten knowledge. Not 
having the advantage of this old prescription, I can 
only polish up the mirror in which I see, surrounding 
me, the faces of a most interesting company. Like 
the genii who appeared when Aladdin rubbed his 
lamp, these old friends and acquaintances rise up 
before memory's eye when I brush away the mists 
of years. 

One night, not so long ago, I sat at a public dinner, 
admiring the venerable white head of Alexander 
Graham Bell. The distinguished inventor of the 
telephone sat beside the toastmaster, who was intro- 
ducing him. Slowly the people before me faded in 
a smoky haze and I seemed to hear a far-distant 
voice singing "Auld Lang Syne/' In the twinkling 
of an eye I was back in the 'seventies, a young news- 
paper artist on the trail of a weird tale about a young 
professor in the Boston University who, it was said, 

l 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

was perfecting a device for projecting the human 
voice over a wire. 

Young Professor Bell was not seeking publicity. 
In fact, he was seeking seclusion, and I had great 
difficulty in locating him; but at last one afternoon 
I caught him at the university. A short talk with 
him evidently dismissed any suspicions he may have 
had of a dangerous knowledge of science on my part. 
He invited me to witness an interesting work in 
which he was engaged at the university, and I went 
with him into an empty recitation hall, where a 
young lady — a deaf mute — soon appeared for a 
lesson in speech. Professor Bell said to me, as he 
stood with her on a platform at the end of the hall: 
"Until two months ago this young woman had never 
spoken a word in her life. She is now learning lip 
reading and the spoken word. She will speak to 
you." This she did, saying quite distinctly that it 
was a pleasant evening. 

It may be interesting to describe, as I remember it, 
something of Professor Bell's method of teaching. 
He threw back his head and the young woman 
placed her sensitive fingers on his throat; then 
over and over again he went through the vowel 
sounds — she endeavoring to imitate him through 
the varying shades of vibration. We left the uni- 
versity, and on our way to the house where Pro- 
fessor Bell was conducting his experiments with the 
telephone he explained to me how his work in teach- 
ing mechanical speech to deaf mutes was largely the 
basis of his idea to make the wire transmit human 
speech. 

2 



/ 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Finally we came to a little blind street or court. 
At the upper end of it was a tiny, three-story house. 
This was the den of the magician, the house of 
Merlin, but this great wizard was carefully disguised 
as a modest young junior professor. 

I was young, perhaps twenty years of age; he 
wasn't much older, about twenty-seven, I think; 
and having decided to take me in behind the scenes, 
he led me to an upper floor where, amid coils of 
wire and experimental instruments in various states 
of completion, there lay on a table something 
closely resembling an old box trap such as we used 
to set for muskrats when I was a boy — just an 
oblong box with a round mouthpiece inserted at one 
end and a couple of insulated wires leading out from 
a mysterious interior — as nearly as I can recollect. 

After explaining to me how the various vowel 
sounds were reproduced in different series of wave 
lengths, he ran downstairs to the basement, and 
from the rudely constructed telephone, through coils 
of wire piled up on the staircase and out of the 
magic muskrat trap, came the strains of "Auld 
Lang Syne." The voice of Alexander Graham Bell 
was coming to me, in the old, familiar song, over 
half a mile of wire. 

Professor Bell had the simplicity of manner of a 
man absorbed in his work, with never a thought of 
the great place it was to make for him for all time 
in the scientific world. The sketches which I made 
at that time for the Daily Graphic bring back many 
memories of my visit to the little house at the end 
of the court. Something must have whispered to 

3 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

me that I was making sketches of a very important 
historical event and that no little detail should be 
neglected. 

There is the one of Professor Bell seated at the 
"in'ards" of a cheap cabinet organ or melodeon. 
One sees that he is experimenting in the transmission 
of musical sounds over the telephone. The patterns 
of the wallpaper and of the carpet are shown, even 
the design on the window shade. It was not re- 
markably artistic work, but the material for a 
historical picture is there — the picture of a white 
owl on the wall, the chair on which Professor Bell is 
seated, the detail of the wiring and of the box tele- 
phone, the height of the ceiling. All these trifling 
details are what give a picture of this kind a sense 
of reality. They tell the story of patient work 
in a little, low-ceiled, cheap room with primitive 
materials. 

The presence of that musical instrument in the 
picture of Professor Bell's expermental room is very 
significant. It tells more than appears at a glance 
of the bypaths that were explored by Bell and others 
before they finally struck the main road to the 
transmission of human speech by wire. In a lecture 
delivered before the Society of Telegraph Engineers 
in London in 1877, Professor Bell said: "I imagined 
to myself a series of tuning forks of different pitches, 
arranged to vibrate automatically in the manner 
shown by Helmholtz" (Helmholtz had some years 
before discovered the pitch of the various vowel 
sounds), "each fork interrupting, at every vibration, 

a voltaic current — and the thought occurred to me, 

4 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Why should not the depression of a key like that of a 
piano direct the interrupted current from any one of 
these forks through a telegraph wire to a series of 
electromagnets operating the strings of a piano, 
in which case a person might play on the tuning- 
fork piano in one place and the music might be 
audible from an electromagnetic piano in a distant 
city?" 

My recollection of Professor Bell is very vivid. 
I can see him now, a slenderly built man, exceed- 
ingly quick, but easy in every movement. When 
we entered the little house he took the two flights 
of stairs on the run. It is dangerous to describe the 
color of a man's hair after such a length of time, but 
I have the most distinct impression that his hair 
was brown and not very dark. He wore the mus- 
taches and side whiskers which were in vogue, and 
they were of a lighter shade of brown. I particularly 
remember he had a fine complexion, white, but 
tinged with a good healthy color. One impression 
that invariably comes up, when I think of this 
young college professor, is that he seemed entirely 
unconscious of being anything more than that. 
For my part, I am sure I recognized him at the time 
as a wizard of wizards and wondered then that he 
seemed not to realize it. 

The telephone is such a commonplace part of our 
homes and offices to-day that one can hardly realize 
what a magical thing it seemed to hear the creator 
of it send the notes of " Auld Lang Syne" over half 
a mile of wire. 

I think the first public demonstration of the 

5 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

telephone was held in Salem. Perhaps Professor 
Bell did realize that he was a wizard, after all, and 
it may have been for the justification of the witches, 
who were so mistreated in that ancient town, that 
he performed feats of witchcraft or wizardry before 
its citizens. The symbols of his invention, as shown 
on a blackboard at that demonstration, certainly 
would have looked to the Salem of witchcraft days 
sufficiently like the black art to have insured Pro- 
fessor Bell a ducking in the bay. 

This visit to Boston on the trail of the telephone 
was in behalf of the Daily Graphic, the first fully 
illustrated daily newspaper to be published in this 
or any other country, so far as I know. It was 
really a splendid venture, was well printed, and 
made a great hit at the time. Although it proved 
to be too expensive to prove a lasting financial suc- 
cess, it gave a number of young artists an oppor- 
tunity to try their wings. I have only to name 
Arthur B. Frost, Charles J. Taylor, Dan Beard, and 
E. W. Kemble to show what a school it was for 
work in line. 

A little upstairs room on the Ann Street side of 
Mouquin's restaurant was known as the Graphic 
room in the 'seventies. There around the table at 
luncheon time an interesting group was gathered. 
From Paris and Vienna the Graphic people had 
drawn a number of artists, some of them already 
well known in their specialties — Theodore Wtist, a 
caricaturist of great ability; Rudolph Piguet, por- 
trait painter and etcher; Gray Parker, a Parisian 

of English parentage; Louis Aubron, an expert 

6 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

lithographer; and Thure de Thulstrup, just out of 
the French army. At the table in Mouquin's also 
appeared such unknown young men as Daniel 
Frohman, Andrew Miller, Arthur B. Frost, E. W. 
Kemble, C. D. Weldon, C. J. Taylor, Frank Taylor, 
and others equally obscure. 

I well remember my first introduction to the 
Oraphic room. French people and French ways 
were new to me. Even before we had finished our 
soup there was a grand set-to over something (or 
nothing) between Aubron, who was a big, sturdy 
Frenchman, and a little spidery-looking fellow with 
fierce mustachios and a strong Gascon accent. 

When the argument became overheated the little 
Frenchman leaped up on his chair, placed both 
hands on the middle of the table, and was apparently 
about to jump down Aubron's throat. Then sud- 
denly he collapsed like a jackknife and calmly 
proceeded to eat his soup. Aubron was a Com- 
munist to whom the atmosphere of Paris was just 
at that time unwholesome. 

He was a past master of architectural drawing 
and lithography. In Paris he made a profession of 
going over the perspective of paintings. Gerdme, 
for instance, was said to have employed him in 
elaborate perspectives. He was credited with 
having laid in the architectural detail of a number 
of Babylonian subjects for Gustave Dor6. "I put 
in ze detail; Dore take him out!" was the way he 
explained his work to me. 

Of all the men at the table, Piguet was the quietest. 
He painted some charming portraits of women while 

7 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

over here, but was always homesick for Paris and 
soon returned there. 

Old-timers who know their Broadway will re- 
member Thomas's Art Gallery and its caricature 
portraits of prominent Americans. I think it was 
located near Thirtieth Street. Almost all the cari- 
catures, life-size as a rule, were the work of Theodore 
Wtist. For the Graphic he drew some very clever 
caricature portraits. At the luncheon table he was 
rather a saturnine figure — never a word unless it 
flashed out like a clean rapier cut. 

Thure de Thulstrup often sat at this table. Over 
at the Graphic art department he was showing traits 
of strength which developed later. 

Gray Parker was an Englishman by blood, but a 
Frenchman by birth and bringing up. He would 
compose little coaching scenes with the English 
precision of harness, buckle, and strap, and accuracy 
of proper form, and then proceed to draw it all with 
a bubbling French enthusiasm. His little horses 
pranced across the pages of the Graphic and looked 
as though only their high sense of propriety pre- 
vented them from snorting. Gray liked his one 
small glass of absinthe, which he took with great 
precision, and if he had that and endless cigarettes 
the rest of his luncheon did not matter. 

Everyone who used to read Puck remembers the 

charming drawings which appeared in that paper 

by C. J. Taylor. It would surprise most people to 

know that in 187S Taylor was an ambitious young 

lawyer as well as an artist. Taylor liked good food 

8 




THE FIRST TELEPHONE 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

and good company, and often came to the little 
Ann Street place for luncheon. 

And then there was A. B. Frost, drawing at that 
time for the Graphic. Let posterity decide whether 
A. B. Frost was the Caran d'Ache of America or 
Caran d'Ache the A. B. Frost of France. Sure it is 
that if Caran d'Ache had lived in New York he 
would have eaten at that table. 

Another youngster from the West came to the 
Ann Street room later on — E. W. Kemble, whose 
learned researches in Thompson Street have so 
enriched our knowledge of poker. 

Newspaper readers with long memories will re- 
call some delightful humorous drawings, signed 
"L. Hop," in the early numbers of the Graphic. "L. 
Hop" had a big idea one day. He would go out 
and amuse the Australians. He did, and the Austra- 
lians rewarded him with gold and fame. For many 
years Mr. L. Hopkins has been the Thomas Nast of 
Australia. 

As I look back to those old days I see a quaint 
figure of a little man with a beautiful forehead, with 
brilliant black eyes that sparkled with humor and 
yet had depths of sadness lurking in them — Mike 
Woolf, who gave us those funny, pathetic little 
street waifs, pictures that brought smiles to the lips 
and tears to the eyes, Mike Woolf, who was the 
greatest asset the Fresh Air Fund ever had. 

Mitchell, of Life, told me that a very wealthy 

woman once said to him that a little picture of 

Mike WoolFs published in the Christmas number 

of Life cost her fifteen hundred dollars. The picture 

9 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

represented two poor little shivering tots out in the 
snow, looking at a window in which hung a large 
wreath of holly. In the center of the wreath were the 
letters I. H. S. One tot says to the other, "What 
does I. H. S. stand for, Jimmy? " " Doncher know? " 
answers Jimmy. "Dat means 'I Have Stockings 'I " 
Milady got out first her handkerchief — and then her 
check book, being a practical person. 

It was in 1877 that I went over to the Harpers, 
there to work with Abbey, Reinhart, Pyle and 
Frost, Sol Eytinge and Thomas Nast. 

It was a great company. Nast at that time lived 
in Morristown, New Jersey, so that we saw but 
little of him. His cartoons were drawn on the wood 
block, and his spelling was as bad as his general 
intelligence was great. My first regular job, after 
it was discovered that I could spell, was to go over 
the lettering in his cartoons and correct the spelling. 

I had no idea of becoming a cartoonist at that 
time, and, while I admired the peculiar genius of 
Thomas Nast, it was the drawing of young Ned 
Abbey that claimed most of my attention. There 
never was anybody like Abbey; we all looked on 
him as something apart. He was the most genial, 
lovable young fellow imaginable; yet one felt an 
intangible something which surrounded him with a 
touch of impenetrable mystery. Lafcadio Hearn 
would describe it as a "ghostliness"; but it had 
nothing repellent in it. 

Abbey was making his first Herrick drawings then. 
He had never been in England, but he seemed to 
know the England and the English of Queen Anne's 

10 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

time by some sure instinct. There were times when 
Abbey, in the midst of a laughing, joking conversa- 
tion, would disappear (I can use no other word) 
into the past. One moment he was with you, the 
next he walked with Doctor Goldsmith, or on the 
hills of Devon with Robert Herrick. 

Abbey had a studio on Thirteenth Street, where 
he worked part of the time. Early one morning I 
met him in front of the old Union Square Theater 
on Fourteenth Street. The block between Fourth 
Avenue and Broadway was then known as The 
Rialto and was usually crowded with gentlemen in 
weird clothing who assumed stage attitudes and 
talked into one another's faces at close range. 
Making his way through this busy-seeming throng 
of idlers — they probably thought he was the prop- 
erty man's assistant — little Ned Abbey appeared, 
carrying an enormous tub out of which grew a long 
sprig of English ivy trained upon a wooden frame. 

When he saw me his face broke out into a most 
cheerful grin while be told how a Fourth Avenue 
florist had loaned him the ivy as a model for one of 
his Herrick drawings. I left him at the foot of the 
studio stairs (four long flights were before him) on 
Thirteenth Street. 

One of the extraordinary qualities of Abbey was 

his attention to small matters of costume, furniture, 

and little background accessories, without allowing 

these details to hamper his imagination. I have 

seen his model dressed in a gown which he had had 

made to orde>, sitting in a corner of his studio, 

reading a newspaper, while Abbey was intent on his 

11 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

picture, calling on her to pose only when he wished 
to inform himself on some little detail. Nobody 
else worked like that. 

In these days, when no public event can happen 
without a battery of cameras being trained on its 
details, it may not be amiss to tell just how such a 
matter was handled for an illustrated paper in the 
'seventies and 'eighties. What the camera does so 
easily to-day the artist had to do all by himself 
then. An illustrator of to-day hardly realizes how 
much he owes in the way of facts to the instan- 
taneous photograph. 

In the 'seventies we had to memorize details of 
which there was perhaps no record other than a 
hasty sketch. When a "big" news event was to be 
pictured one of us youngsters had to go out, armed 
only with pad and pencil, and gather up whatever 
he could of the details, whether it was of a proces- 
sion, reception, celebration, or accident. He then 
brought his sketches to the art department, laid out 
a page or double page, traced it roughly on the box- 
wood block, and divided the jointed block into 
several pieces — and then everybody took a hand at 
the drawing. 

For instance, I was once sent to Boston for Har- 
per's Weekly and brought back sketches of some 
historical celebration where the participants were 
dressed in costumes of the Revolution. Abbey came 
down from his Thirteenth Street studio and drew 
the foreground figures, while I filled in those in the 
middle distance and background. Old "Dory" 

Davis, a veteran "special artist" of the Civil War, 

12 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

drew the architecture, put in the dome of the State 
House and the Sacred Codfish thereon. We used to 
pass the blocks we were working on back and forth 
to one another to make the joints, and I remember 
well how Abbey, as we worked side by side, gave me 
many a quick illuminating insight into some intricacy 
of form. Never have I seen a man with more deft 
skill in the handling of a pencil on the wooden block. 

While in his serious work Ned Abbey would draw 
a figure over and over a dozen times and rub and 
scrape out what looked perfect to me, yet in a 
" hurry-up " job he bent his knowledge to the swift, 
inevitable line unerringly. 

The methods used in those days in producing a 
"news" drawing have passed away so completely 
that it may be interesting to the illustrator of to- 
day to know in detail just how we handled a wood- 
block drawing. Of course, it must be understood 
that many drawings on wood were made by artists 
working entirely alone — often very careful work 
carried out in studios with models and accessories 
carefully studied. What I shall endeavor to describe 
now is the "rush" work, pictorial records of news of 
the day, such as the instantaneous photograph, 
reproduced in "half tone," gives to the public to-day 
in the daily papers. 

Before going into the exact methods of drawing on 

wood, it will be as well to describe the wood block 

itself. A double-page block for Harper's Weekly was 

usually made up of thirty-six pieces of boxwood 

about one inch in thickness, cut across the grain and 

highly polished. The back of each piece of wood 

13 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

was hollowed out to admit steel bolts which ran 
through to the adjoining section, and when tightened 
held the whole together in a single smooth block. 

A very thin film of Chinese white was rubbed into 
the surface of the block to kill the warm color of the 
boxwood and afford a surface for pencil lines. The 
first step in making the illustration was to draw a 
rough sketch on paper the exact size of the com- 
posite wood block. From this a tracing was made, 
which was rubbed down reversed on the block. If 
the subject was a street scene the perspective was 
carefully worked out in the sketch. 

After the tracing on the block was completed one 
of the men, with a brush and India ink, laid in the 
main broad shadows. Before the "figure man" out- 
lined his people or his horses (no automobiles in 
those days), or whatever details were to form the 
main subject of the picture, the two, three, or even 
four men who were to work on the drawing would 
get together and determine how deep a tone was to 
pervade the whole composition. Each man had to 
carry this in his mind, else the picture when com- 
pleted would never hold together. Many of these 
drawings of news subjects were made in a wash 
emphasized by sharp pencil lines, that being rather 
an old-fashioned method which descended to us 
from the "slippery" period of illustration. But as 
we became more skillful and, I think I may say, 
more artistic in our ideas, we learned to make our 
drawings entirely with a brush. It was surprising 
how well a group of men used to working together 
could keep a composition from flying to pieces, 

14 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Where a figure or an object in one of these com- 
posite pictures happened to cross a joint the figure 
or object was finished before the block was taken 
apart, and this gave a clew to the tone to be adhered 
to. When any part of the drawing was completed, 
that section often went to the engraving room at 
once. There the same thing was done in regard to 
objects crossing joints — they were engraved first so 
that each engraver had a clew to the width of line 
his neighbor was using. I remember one drawing I 
made of a double page, working alone, in which I 
never saw the entire picture together until it appeared 
in the paper. 

Charles Graham, who had the finest sense of per- 
spective of any man I ever knew, made wonderful 
architectural drawings on wood. It was a pleasure 
to draw on the same block with him, for by a clever 
manipulation of light and shade he would adapt his 
architectural details to my figures. Many a night 
out on the road we juggled architecture and figures 
back and forth on a wood block under a single gas 
jet in a hotel bedroom. 

I once made a rather touching sketch of little 
Charley Graham in his nightshirt, holding up a 
block close to a miserable flickering light, and with 
his skillful left hand putting on the finishing touches 
to one of our joint drawings. All that is a thing of 
the past; now a photographer goes out with his 
camera and — click ! — he has it all in half the wink of 
an eye. 

I remember one day, after his return from his first 
visit to England, Ned Abbey was putting the finish- 

15 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

ing touches on a water color, a picture called "The 
Sisters/' which added greatly to his reputation. 
Since it was the day of the exhibition, one would 
naturally have supposed that his picture would be 
finished and hung. But not at all. I walked into 
his studio and found him busily at work on the face 
of the foreground figure. At the last moment he 
had washed it out and was painting it all over again 
— so great pains did he take with his finished work. 

I took one look and started downstairs again at 
full speed, but Abbey was too quick for me. He 
had me by the collar in a moment and dragged me 
up again. 

"Are you good at painting rugs?" he asked. 

In the picture was a Persian rug, half of it painted 
in elaborate detail, the other half barely outlined. 
I quickly effaced myself by diving into some port- 
folios and remained hidden behind them until lunch 
was announced. Down in the dining room, where 
Gedney Bunce and another guest sat at table, Abbey 
told stories — told of his experiences in London — and 
I had finally to take him by the shoulders and start 
him up the stairs to his studio. 

That evening at seven-thirty I walked into the ex- 
hibition gallery, fearing that Abbey's picture would 
surely be absent; but there in its frame, which, 
by the way, had preceded the picture by some hours, 
hung the picture, beautiful, finished — the rug with- 
out a flaw. 

At this time Stanley Reinhart was living in Paris, 
and it was not until some years afterward that I 
came to know him. C. S. Reinhart was a most 

16 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

distinguished member of the guild, if such I may 
call it, of American illustrators of the 'eighties; but, 
in addition to that, he had talents which assured 
him a welcome wherever he went. Julian Ralph 
wrote a story about him in the Sun, which he called 
"An Artist Telling a Story." 

Reinhart had a positive genius for making inter- 
esting stories out of trifles. As Julian Ralph said: 
"When another person told a story, you heard it. 
When Reinhart told a story, you saw it." We used 
to beg Reinhart to write, but he told me once that 
when he took a pen in his hand the ink in it promptly 
froze solid. You see in that the pictorial quality of 
his thought. 

In the 'seventies everybody used to look in the 
magazines for a new story in verse by Will Carleton. 
Carleton was a country man who knew his neigh- 
bors better than they knew themselves; and he 
touched some sore spots in the rural character as no 
one, perhaps, had ever touched them before. His 
"Over the Hill to the Poorhouse" must have stung 
many a tough hide like the cut of a "black-snake" 
whip. Carleton became a good deal of a philosopher 
of the optimistic school as he grew older, and he had 
a keen wit which he used to advantage in defending 
his faith. I remember we were walking down the 
Bowery one day and he was arguing that every man, 
no matter how worthless, had some good in him. I 
asked him what good there was in a confidence man. 

"Just enough for bait!" he answered. 

In 1880 came the Hancock campaign. The Demo- 
cratic party was in dire straits. Defeat had hung 

17 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

on its banners in one campaign after another for 
many years. The old party was fast becoming 
mummified, and something radical had to be done to 
revive it. Then some bright political genius thought 
of Gen. Winfield Scott Hancock. Perhaps his war 
record and his high personal character would carry 
the party through to victory. He was nominated. 

About this time I dropped in one morning at the 
art department of Harper 9 s Weekly. Mr. J. Henry 
Harper was expressing his concern over Mr. Nast's 
absence — on a lecture tour, I think — and the neces- 
sity of getting a cartoon, somehow, for the next issue 
of the Weekly. 

Up to that time I had done nothing in that line 
for the Weekly; but instantly there came to me a 
picture of a transfusion of blood from the veins of 
the strong, healthy general to the moribund figure 
of the Democracy. I sketched it out roughly and 
handed it to Mr. Harper. He was inclined to accept 
the idea, but doubted if I could make a cartoon. I 
wasn't sure myself, but was willing to take a chance 
and make the drawing on approval. The approval 
came along when it was finished, and I suddenly 
found myself a full-fledged cartoonist. I have told 
this incident to show what a large part chance plays 
in our lives. 

Up until that morning I had gone placidly along, 
illustrating magazine articles, boys' stories, and 
doing the work on Harper's Weekly that the camera 
so easily performs now — making drawings of news 
events, riots, celebrations, conventions, and what 
not. By a turn of the wheel I now was plunged 

18 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

into the whirl of thought on public affairs — on the 
big political happenings of the world. It was like 
the fate of a boatman who has been rowing about 
in some small tributary and who finds himself sud- 
denly carried out on the broad surface and swift 
current of a great river. 



CHAPTER II 

CARTOON work occupied only & part of my 
time at Harpers'. Many were the news 
assignments on which I journeyed from 
place to place. Most important of these was a trip 
to Washington at the time of the assassination of 
President Garfield. At eight o'clock in the morning 
after the President was shot I met by appointment 
Mr. Bell, a well-known photographer of Washington, 
at the Arlington Hotel. The Harpers had depended 
on him to furnish a photograph of Guiteau, the 
assassin. Mr. Bell threw up both hands as we met 
in the corridor. 

"No use," he cried. "Attorney-General Wayne 
MacVeagh declares that no photograph shall ever 
be made of Guiteau. He positively refuses to allow 
us, or anyone else, to see Guiteau in the jail." 

It so happened that, late the night before, on my 
arrival at the hotel, an artist whom I knew and who 
represented the Daily Graphic of New York showed 
me a hasty pencil sketch of Guiteau, which he had 
made at the jail when the assassin was brought in. 
That was handle enough for me, and in spite of Bell's 
protests that it was useless, I dragged the unwill- 
ing photographer over to Mr. MacVeagh's house at 
that unseasonable hour. 

An old colored butler assured us that the Attorney - 

20 



^ 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

General had not yet arisen; but I begged for a mo- 
ment's interview, and in a couple of minutes Mr. 
MacVeagh appeared at the door in his dressing gown. 
He was, very pardonably, not in the most amiable 
of moods. 

I stated my case briefly and asked if Harper's 
Weekly, a national paper, was to be discriminated 
against in favor of the Daily Qraphic, a local paper 
of New York. Was an inadequate sketch to go out 
as a portrait of the assassin, when we had Mr. Bell 
ready to make a true likeness of Guiteau, which 
everyone in the country wished to see? 

Mr. MacVeagh interrupted my little speech to 
say very cuttingly that he did not believe a word of 
my story of the Graphic artist. 

I straightened up and asked him point-blank if 
he believed for an instant that Harper's Weekly 
would send to him a man who was a liar. He looked 
me in the eye for almost a minute and then very 
courteously said he was sure they would not. Inside 
of ten minutes he had given me a letter to District- 
Attorney Corkhill, authorizing him to admit Mr. 
Bell to the jail for the purpose of photographing 
the assassin. That was one of the cases where a 
quick, sharp fight won the day. At other times 
entirely different tactics had to be employed. 

Several days after obtaining the photograph of 
Guiteau, I went down to Washington again to get 
pictures in and about the White House, where Presi- 
dent Garfield lay hovering between life and ddath. 
This was a very delicate matter and had to be 
handled with great care. At the Arlington I met 

31 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Frank Bennett, then a young clerk at the hotel desk. 
In later days he was known and trusted by Senators, 
diplomats, and Presidents, and was probably the 
depositary of more political secrets than any man in 
Washington. When I met him he was scarcely more 
than a boy, but with a wise head on his young 
shoulders. 

He suggested a plan of action which was success- 
fully carried out. 

I sent a messenger boy to each of the physicians 
and surgeons attending the President, asking each 
for his photograph for Harper's Weekly. I also sent 
messengers to several important officials of the 
White House staff, with the same request. This 
would furnish me with the portraits I needed, and 
at the same time gave me a favorable introduction 
to all these gentlemen. I obtained the photographs. 

Then I went to Mr. Stanley Brown, the President's 
private secretary, and made my plea. I dwelt on the 
natural and sympathetic desire of the public to know 
the exact surroundings of the President in his fight 
for life. I reminded him that, in any case, pictures 
would be printed in less conscientious publications 
than Harper's Weekly and this, being a matter of 
history, should be accurately portrayed. I asked 
Mr. Brown to try to obtain the consent of the 
physicians and of the President's family for me to 
make a sketch of the sick room. That was on 
Saturday. Mr. Brown thought it hardly possible, 
but said he would do all he could to obtain permis- 
sion for me. 

Late that night I saw the private secretary again. 

22 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

He told me to come to the White House at eight 
o'clock the next morning, before the usual throng of 
reporters and others arrived, and said he would see 
what could be done. I was a very early visitor at 
Mr. Brown's office on Sunday morning, and sat there 
for an hour. A few stragglers dropped in from time 
to time. At last an inner door opened a crack and 
Mr. Brown motioned to me to come over. We dis- 
appeared into the Cabinet room and thence passed 
into the President's private quarters. 

I was ushered into a corridor from which there 
opened, much in the nature of a large alcove, the 
room in which the President lay sleeping. Several 
of the physicians were grouped about the room, and 
Mrs. Susan Edson, the nurse, sat beside the bed with 
a large palm-leaf fan, which she held ready to drop 
in front of the patient's face in case he awakened. 
I had my sketch pad out instantly, and I can remem- 
ber no half hour of my life when I put so much on 
paper. Mrs. Garfield and her eldest son, Harry, 
looked for a moment over my shoulder as I worked, 
and that, I felt, gave me just the touch of author- 
ity which was needed. 

I laid out my drawing for the Weekly, double- 
page size, that day at the Arlington, young Frank 
Bennett rejoicing with me at the success of our little 
enterprise in diplomacy. 

At nine o'clock on Monday morning I stepped into 
the art department of Harper's Weekly. Mr. Parsons, 
the art superintendent, jumped to his feet. 

"My dear boy," he exclaimed, "why did you leave 
Washington? Postmaster-General James is working 

£8 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

to get you into the White House, and we are sure he 
will be able to do so before this week is over. You 
must return at once!" For answer, of course, I un- 
rolled my bundle of sketches made at the President's 
bedside. I don't recollect exactly what Mr. Parsons 
did, but he was an impulsive old gentleman and my 
impression is that he hugged me. 

The controversy which arose in February, 1920, 
over the right of the Cabinet to meet while President 
Wilson lay ill and unable to transact the public 
business during the fall and winter months of the 
previous year, reminds me that I "sat in" at a 
Cabinet meeting one hot July night in 1881, while 
President Garfield lay helpless and hardly conscious 
in his bed, a few yards distant. 

I drew a picture that night, from life, of James 
G. Blaine, Robert Lincoln, Kirkwood of Iowa, and 
other members of the Cabinet, which was published 
in Harper's Weekly under the title of "An Anxious 
Night in the Cabinet." 

It was considered, at that time, a perfectly proper 
proceeding for members of the Cabinet to meet in- 
formally under the extraordinary circumstances; I 
never heard the propriety of it even discussed. 

I remember particularly that a bust of Abraham 
Lincoln occupied a place over the door leading to the 
private secretary's offices, and that Robert Lincoln 
stood directly beneath it. No one sat down at the 
council table. Everyone was in a state of nervous 
tension and walked about the Cabinet room, gather- 
ing from time to time around Mr. Blaine, who was 
generally the magnet wherever he appeared in those 

S4 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

days. In an interview published in the New York 
Times of February 16, 1920, Mr. Robert Lincoln said 
that no formal meetings of the Cabinet were held 
during the period when Garfield lay helpless; but 
he also said that the matter of the President's pos- 
sible disability to perform the duties of his office was 
discussed by members of the Cabinet, together with 
the possibility of the Vice-President having to assume 
those duties in his place. 

The sun beat down pitilessly in those July days 
and the intense heat penetrated to the sick room of 
the President. Public sympathy was so wrought upon 
by the suspense of his long fight for life that all sorts 
of suggestions poured into the White House to better, 
if possible, his chances for recovery or to mitigate his 
discomforts. 

One morning the driveway from Jackson Square 
was blocked with ice wagons; some one had sug- 
gested filling the basement floor with ice. After it 
was filled, no effect from the piles of ice was apparent 
even a few feet distant. Another suggestion was 
made to pour streams of water over the ice in order 
to start the cool air upward. Inside of five min- 
utes two fire engines were at work spraying the ice. 
Very little real help came from the many suggestions 
sent in, but they served, at any rate, to express 
the emotion of the people. 

One day as I was leaving the grounds an elderly 

man stopped me at the White House gate to inquire — 

everyone inquired of everyone else in those anxious 

days — for the latest news of the President's condi- 

S5 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

tion. We fell into conversation and I saw a curious 
expression steal over his face as he said: 

"I was a treasury clerk during the war, and of 
course this brings back the time when Lincoln was 
assassinated and the terrible days that followed; but 
I had one experience with Mr. Lincoln that comes 
to me always with a picture of his old, baggy, black 
suit, his rusty tall hat, and his whimsical smile. 

"As I said, I was a young treasury clerk, and in 
addition to my duties in the Treasury Building I 
belonged to the Home Guard and was liable to be 
called out for guard duty after office hours at any 
time. One night I had arranged to go to a ball and 
had arrayed myself in my best claw-hammer, my 
most immaculate vest, and a silk hat. I was about 
to leave the house when a call for guard duty came. 
No time for a change of raiment — but one thing to 
do, shoulder my musket and march all night in front 
of the Treasury Building! 

"In the early gray dawn I saw the long, sham- 
bling figure of the President coming down the White 
House walk. He had his hands folded behind his 
back and his head was bowed. Evidently he was out 
to do a little quiet thinking by himself. He ap- 
proached, and when he was still a few feet away I 
stiffened up in true military form and presented arms 
to the commander in chief of the artny and navy of 
the United States. 

"Mr. Lincoln stopped, looked at me carefully, and 
then inquired what regiment I belonged to. I felt a 
good deal flustered, but managed to reply that I was 
treasury-clerk So-and-so called for guard duty in 

26 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

such-and-such a company and regiment of the Home 
Guard. 

" The President looked at my top hat, at my patent- 
leather pumps, my claw-hammer coat, and my old 
army musket, and he said, 'Well, young man, I did 
not wish to be too inquisitive, but I can't get used 
to all these new uniforms.'" 

In the nineteenth century there were some very 
violent prejudices raging up and down the land 
which seem happily to have faded from view in the 
twentieth. 

There was a very bitter gentleman named Eugene 
Lawrence who used to write unkind things about the 
Catholic Church for Harper's Weekly when I first 
went to Franklin Square. It was the fashion then, 
and had been for years, to take strong sides on sec- 
tarian questions and to believe the devil was on the 
side of anyone who disagreed with you. I am glad 
to say that this attitude on the part of the Weekly 
was changing even then, and soon a more liberal view 
took its place. 

On a certain day in the spring an ancient pagan 
custom of going up to a high place at daybreak and 
singing a song of praise as the sun came up is still 
observed by some of the people at Paterson, New 
Jersey. This custom is so strikingly similar to the 
Easter ceremony observed by the Moravian Church 
at Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, that I have no doubt 
both have the same origin in the dim past and that 
back in the mountains of eastern Europe an old 
pagan ceremony was grafted on to the new religion. 
Just outside Paterson is a "mountain" ending on 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

its easterly side in an abrupt cliff which overlooks 
the city. Here the people assemble, sometimes many 
thousands of them, to celebrate the coming of the 
spring — or to worship the sun, perhaps, if the thought 
down deep in their subconscious minds could be 
divined. 

On one occasion of this kind some of the great 
crowd of people who had assembled aroused the ire 
of an eccentric old farmer who lived alone in a little 
stone house on top' of the mountain, and he got out 
his shotgun and fired into the crowd, slightly wound- 
ing a boy, I think. At any rate, enough was done to 
start a riot and every window pane in the farmer's 
house was smashed. Some of his neighbors came to 
the rescue and there was a beautiful "shindy." The 
old man was badly mauled as he was being dragged 
away by his friends; and at last he and they all took 
refuge in another farmhouse half a mile distant. 

A crowd once angered, as this one was, becomes 
dangerous very quickly. Some wise person, realizing 
this, slipped down the mountain and made for the 
house of an old Irish priest who, he felt, was the only 
man able to quell the riot. 

It seemed to me, when I heard of how the old 
priest handled the affair, that here was a good story 
for Harper's Weekly. I liked the idea of a picture in 
Harper's Weekly favoring a Catholic priest, and pro- 
posed it as the subject for a picture and a story. 

When I walked up the front steps of the priest's 
house in Paterson it was with considerable doubt 
as to my reception. In the hall was a long bench, 
and on it sat a row of people who had business with 

28 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the good father. The door was open into the priest's 
reception room. I was told by the attendant to take 
a seat on the bench and await my turn. 

Then I heard the tales of woe that came to that 
supreme court to be settled. The poor and the 
ignorant came there to have their poverty relieved 
or their thinking done for them — their little daily 
problems solved by a wise old head and a kindly 
old heart. 

As I sat on the bench I learned what a real priest 
is and means to his parish. From the priest's room 
I heard an indistinct murmur, with interjections at 
every few words — "And, oh, Father!" and more 
woeful accents. 

Then the old priest's words rang out sharp and 
clear: "And it's drunk you were, and bate your wife 
who bore your children! God forgive you! And 
you've lost your job at the lumberyard. You well 
deserve it, and if it wasn't for your wife and chil- 
dren, never a hand would I lift to get you back. Go 
home, shame to you ! and be ready to work Monday 
morning. Good day." And out came a shamefaced 
man and shuffled down the front steps. 

Then in went a weeping woman. 

"Your son's run away, Mrs. Mulcahey? How 
old is he? . . . Twelve. Hum! Here, Johnson, get 
me the paper. . . . Twelve years old. ... I thought 
so. The circus was here yesterday — shows in Newark 
to-day. Go home, Mrs. Mulcahey. I'll have your 
son back to-morrow. Good day!" 

And Mrs. Mulcahey came out with smiles break- 
ing through her tears. Would her son be home 

29 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

again to-morrow? Of course! Hadn't she the priest's 
word for it? 

Then one or two went in whose troubles and the 
solutions therefor didn't reach me. Only one man 
remained with me on the bench, and he was wiping 
his eyes with a big red handkerchief, every now and 
then heaving a weary sigh — evidently a very sad 
case. As the sound of the last sharp "Good day!" 
reached him he pulled himself together and took 
his turn. 

I heard the old priest give an exclamation. "Now 
ye don't tell me, Dick, she's i^in away at last! I 
feared it, but I thought the baby might hold her 
a bit." 

Then the man's voice: "No, Father, and the baby 
but three months old, and Jinny has run away an' 
the babe cryin' for milk!" 

"Never mind, man, never mind; 'tis good rid- 
dance. A woman who'd abandon her child as well 
as a decent man is beyond thought. But the child! 
How long since it was fed? . . . Yes, it must have 
milk. Let us see; Mary Clancy is a fine, strapping 
young woman with a young child and a fresh breast. 
I'll send her down to your babe in half an hour. 
Good day!" 

It was my turn. 

I moved to the door and looked in. There in a big 

chair sat a tall, straight, old man with a shock of 

white hair and an eye — such an eye! sharp as an 

eagle's, yet kindly, too. 

Only those who know how violent were the preju- 

so 




A WIZARD'S BLACK ART IN SALEM 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

dices of that day can appreciate how carefully I 
had to make my approach. 

"Father," I said, "you receive many confessions, 
and before I state my business I must make mine; 
then you can determine whether or not you wish to 
hear my errand. I come to you from Harper's 
Weekly." 

"Hum! That is indeed far from a recommendation 
to a priest of the Roman Catholic Church. But you 
have a friendly look. Go on!" 

"Father," I went on, "when I heard of what you 
did yesterday up on the mountain I said to our art 
editor: 'Why can't we have a picture of that? I 
would like to draw a picture and print a story in 
Harper's Weekly favoring a Catholic priest. We've 
had enough on the other side/ 

"Our art editor, who is a broad-minded man, said, 
'Go ahead and get the picture and the story/ I 
have been all over the ground up on the mountain 
and have talked with the people up there who saw 
the riot, and all I need is your story to complete it." 

"Well, my young friend," said the old priest, "I 
think you are the first person who has proposed to 
say something nice about us in your paper and it 
isn't for me to rebuff a friend; but my part in the 
affair on the mountain was but a trifle." 

I had a hard time getting from him the details of 
his rescue of the besieged farmer out of the hands 
of the mob, but as nearly as I can recollect this was 
his story. 

"The people were all up on the hill, worshiping 

God according to their lights, and somebody tres- 

81 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

passed on that crazy old man's little farm near the 
cliff — at least, so it seemed to his poor cracked 
brain; and he got out his shotgun and fired into the 
crowd. It takes mighty little show of blood to set 
a crowd of people wild, and the farmer was a lucky 
man that he wasn't torn to pieces before he took 
refuge in the farmhouse of a neighbor. Word came 
to me that the farmhouse where he was hidden 
was likely to be set fire to or torn down and murder 
committed. I hired a carriage and drove up to 
where the crowd was massed about the house. In- 
side were the old farmer and several of his neighbors. 
The windows were being broken by stones showered 
in by the mob, and the farmers were threatening 
to use their shotguns on the crowd if this weren't 
stopped. I got my carriage slowly up close to the 
front door, edging my way in. The driver and I got 
a few clips with stray stones, but nothing serious, 
and I went inside and persuaded the old farmer 
that his only chance was to come with me. I knew 
my cloth would partly protect us even from an angry 
multitude. When we opened the front door, how- 
ever, and the crowd saw what I was about to do, a 
shower of stones greeted us; but I sheltered the 
poor old fellow as well as possible and we reached 
the carriage. 

"By a plentiful application of the lash we got 
started, and a stone or two striking the horses kept 
them going in spite of the hindrance of the crowd, 
who followed us, threatening to take my passenger 
out and hang him to the nearest tree. I stood up 

in the carriage and talked to them until we got clear. 

33 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Then they suddenly started back to cut us off as we 
swung back to the road leading into Paterson; but 
there is where I played them a scurvy trick, for I 
whipped around into a lane and took the main road 
again for Montclair." 

From the people who saw the whole thing I learned 
that the old priest had a much more dangerous and 
difficult task getting clear with the crazy farmer 
than one would gather from his description, and that 
undoubtedly his priestly robes hid many sharp 
wounds from the stones showered on him by the 
mob. At any rate, he was a splendid old man and 
well deserves a place among those "worth while." 



CHAPTER III 

THE pursuit of news pictures carries an artist 
into little intimate associations, for a day or 
two at a time, with all sorts of people, and 
it is surprising how much alike all people are at close 
range. They are just "folks" when you get to know 
them. 

One very hot summer day I found myself seated 
at dinner in the dining tent of Barnum's circus. 
My table companions were Mr. Bailey, then pro- 
prietor of the show, and George Starr, his business 
manager. The circus had opened for a two or three 
days' stay at Rochester, and I found the show people 
about as worth while as any men and women I had 
ever met. Mr. Bailey was a man who had every 
detail of the business at his fingers' ends. At one 
moment I saw him teaching a new canvas hand a 
number of rope knots; then he spent half an hour 
rehearsing a young Englishman, who was doing a 
"gentleman rider" act, in the duties of an under- 
study to the ringmaster. 

A heavy storm had come up during the afternoon 

performance and made a swamp of the grounds, so 

he sent wagons to a sawmill and had a sawdust path 

ready, when the audience filed out, across to the 

road. Nothing escaped his attention. 

A hostler came in to apologize for having had a 

34 



O 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

horse shod at a blacksmith shop in the town after 
the animal had cast a shoe on a cobblestone street a 
long distance from the circus. To have anyone but 
the circus blacksmith touch his horses' feet, I was 
told, always put Mr. Bailey in a rage. The frog of 
a horse's foot, Mr. Bailey maintained, should not 
be pared, as is generally done by blacksmiths. He 
contended it should be left in its natural state to 
take up the weight of the horse and absorb the 
shock when moving. 

All day long and far into the night the showman 
watched every move of the complicated machine 
which he controlled. 

Mr. Bailey had entertained an officer of the 
United States army on the road for three or four 
weeks some time before I visited the circus. This 
officer was detailed by the War Department to study 
the circus methods of transportation by rail and 
wagon. 

He was an intelligent man," said Mr. Bailey, 

and I was glad to give him all the information 
possible. It was flattering to us and I hope will be 
useful to the army, but I have my doubts whether 
they will be able to follow our ways. You see, we 
have no red tape here. I am the absolute tsar. I 
am not a general who has to give his order to a 
colonel, who passes it along to a captain, he to a 
lieutenant, and he to a sergeant, who finally has a 
private execute it. 

"If no private is available for the moment in my 
establishment I can order my first assistant to do 
the private's work, or, if no assistant is about, I can 

85 






A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

do it myself. Now the show business and the army 
business are quite different." 

An old showman, a driver whom I came in contact 
with one day while with the circus, gave me some 
illuminating views of the "tsar." He was talking 
with a citizen who had formerly been on the road. 

"No, Tom, 'tain't like the old times when you 
could stop along the road an' pick up a load of good 
dry hick'ry cordwood for the cook and mosey 
along with it, say in' nothin' to nobody; or go 
up to a sawmill and fill up with good clean 
sawdust for the hoss stable and give the sawmill 
man the laugh. Why, yistiday, when it rained, I 
had to pay out good hard cash for three or four 
loads up to the sawmill when they wasn't a soul 
about the place to stop me, an' I had to hunt up a 
feller to pay it to. Bailey 'ain't got the heart of a 
showman. What's good wages to a man if y' can't 
cop nothin' off as y' go along?" 

As we sat at the dinner table Mr. Bailey seemed 
perfectly at his ease, casting off the cares of his great 
organization and carrying on a lively conversation. 
He had many questions to ask me about the Harper 
publications, but particularly he wanted to know 
all about George William Curtis. 

"You know George William Curtis? You have 
talked to him? Shaken him by the hand? Well, 
well! that is a great privilege." At that time Mr. 
Curtis was writing the "Easy Chair" in the Maga- 
zine and the leaders in the Weekly 9 and I told Mr. 
Bailey how he used to come in on Thursdays and 

write his Weekly editorials up in the composing 

80 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

room, sitting on a little bench close to an old printer 
who was busy at his case setting up type; how all 
the typesetters up there were his friends, in spite of 
the fact that he was popularly supposed to be of 
rather an exclusive turn of mind. 

"When you see Mr. Curtis," Mr. Bailey said to 
me, "I wish you would tell him that a rough old 
showman" (Mr. Bailey was far from filling his de- 
scription of himself) "looks forward to the 'Easy 
Chair ' as a treat every month, and when the Maga- 
zine is due sends for it at once, in whatever town he 
happens to be showing. I don't know whether this 
will interest him, but it will inform him as to the 
wide audience he reaches and, I think, helps to 
civilize." 

It was indeed, as Mr. Bailey said, a privilege to 
know George William Curtis, and a good deal of an 
education as well. He and Mr. Charles Parsons, art 
superintendent of the Harper publications, were great 
friends and had many things in common. 

Mr. Joseph Pennell has said to me more than once 
that the growth of real and vital American art 
started in the department of Mr. Parsons in Franklin 
Square. 

While Charles Parsons had neither the technical 
training nor the ability to do great things in art 
himself, he had a wonderful intuition and apprecia- 
tion of what others could accomplish. He saw far 
beyond his little environment and, with a sure 
vision, pointed out the right paths to be pursued 
by the young men in his charge. Abbey and Rein- 
hart and Pyle have over and again testified to their 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

indebtedness to him for encouragement and inspi- 
ration. No harder taskmaster, when you were going 
through the trying-out process, could be found than 
Charles Parsons. "Old boys" who read this will 
recall how Japhet, in Captain Marryat's story, 
learned the "rudiments" of pharmacy by grinding 
medicine with a pestle and mortar day after day, 
from morning till night. So it was in Mr. Parsons's 
art department. When a youngster entered it all 
the mechanical, uninteresting work of the place fell 
to his lot. No star parts were given to him to fill, 
and all the time old Charles Parsons was watching 



Only a boy who had no "quitter's" blood in him 
was of the stuff Charles cared to encourage. I re- 
member when I first went to Franklin Square I 
used to try to tempt Mr. Parsons with subjects 
picked up in the streets at lunch time. Perhaps I 
might get a half page to draw. But, no, back I 
was put at the hardest hack work. That went on 
until one day I stumbled across a penny restaurant 
in the slums — the first started in New York. It was 
a novel subject, and I was given a page block of 
good smooth boxwood on which to make my drawing. 
A young actor given a speaking part for the first 
time would know my emotions. I thought, "Now 
I am a star; my fortune is made." But when the 
page was finished, back I went to my old work, 
putting in backgrounds, laying out perspectives— 
the old grind. This continued for a whole year, with 
an occasional respite when I broke into the Weekly 
with some little subject. Then came the "Runaway 

38 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Assignment," the story of which is told in another 
place. 

When I began this chapter I intended to devote 
it to Mr. Curtis, but everyone already knows what 
Mr. Curtis was and what he accomplished. Mr. 
Parsons' s case was different. He worked in the 
shadow of the men he did so much to help. We 
have all seen the results of his fine ideals and prac- 
tical methods, but only a few of us know the source. 
Mr. Curtis appreciated the beautiful idealism of 
the man, but I doubt if he or anyone outside of the 
little group of artists who received their early train- 
ing from him ever knew what a really great man 
Charles Parsons was. 

Mr. Curtis's day at Franklin Square was Thurs- 
day. After I began making cartoons for the Weekly 
it was my privilege to have a little talk with him up 
in the composing room, back of the old typesetter's 
case. It was there that I first realized how different 
is the strategy of the cartoon from the editorial. 
The cartoon makes a frontal attack. To be suc- 
cessful it must be one grand smash, while the editorial 
can attack from all sides — advance, retreat, side- 
step, and get in a dozen raps before it is through. 
For that reason I used to get from Mr. Curtis a 
great deal of political information that was valuable 
as an education, but of not much help in determining 
what to hit for the next week's cartoon. George 
William Curtis had too broad and catholic a mind 
ever to have been a politician. In fact, his one or 
two excursions into the field of politics were disas- 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

trous; but in the discussion of political situations 
he was a master. 

In a cartoon, however, you cannot discuss any- 
thing; you are bound by the natural laws of pictorial 
art to see your subject from one side only. You 
must make up your mind exactly where you stand 
and strike out from that viewpoint. You can no 
more give all sides of a question in a cartoon than 
you can draw all four sides of a house in a picture. 

I remember making this plea, about as it is writ- 
ten here, to Mr. Curtis one day; but I hardly think 
it convinced him. He thought, probably, the natural 
tendency of artists in general to take exaggerated 
views of everything was the real cause of the one- 
sidedness of cartoons. 

My work at Franklin Square was, as I have said, 
many-sided. A Hazard of New Fortunes is often 
spoken of as W. D. Howells's best book. It first 
appeared as a serial in Harper's Weekly, and I made 
the illustrations for it from week to week, as it came 
out. I never saw more than three installments 
ahead, and that only at the beginning. Later on I 
had often to read hastily the galley proofs on Thurs- 
day afternoon and turn in my drawing Friday 
morning. 

Mr. Howells's work is not easy to illustrate, be- 
cause he is usually more interested in what people 
think and what they say than in what people do 
and how they do it. But I was compensated for all 
my troubles through making the acquaintance of 
Mr. Howells, thus forming a friendship which lasted 
for many years. 

40 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

There was one character in the book over whom 
we differed; that was "Fulkerson," the syndicate 
man. Many people imagine that S. S. McClure was 
the model from whom Fulkerson was drawn, but it 
was not so. Mr. Howells had known a "Fulkerson" 
(by some other name, of course) in real life many 
years before, when it was the fashion for a man of 
the world to wear long side whiskers, and it was 
with these adornments that poor Fulkerson was de- 
scribed in the manuscript. Side whiskers had gone 
out beyond recall at the period which A Hazard 
of New Fortunes was supposed to reflect, and I 
pleaded with Mr. Howells to borrow the editorial 
scissors of Harper's Weekly and cut those whiskers off. 

But on this point he would not give way. 
Fulkerson in real life had long side whiskers. 
Mr. Howells was a realist, and Fulkerson's 
whiskers must be introduced to the public in all 
their flowing glory. I hated to do it, but in 
the first picture of the syndicate man I made the 
whiskers appear flowing gently over his collar and 
giving him the appearance of a floorwalker in a 
second-rate dry-goods store. In the next install- 
ment his whiskers were trimmed a trifle shorter; 
and so, from week to week, I performed the office of 
barber, free of charge, to Mr. Fulkerson, until at 
the end he had just a small decoration in front of 
each ear. 

One day I sat with Mr. Howells for a couple of 
hours, talking of many things — among others, of 
this story, A Hazard of New Fortunes. The book 
was suggested, I know, by Mr. Howells's experi- 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

ences when he made a permanent change in his 
place of residence. The struggles of Mr. and Mrs. 
March, in the book, to establish a home in New 
York were his own struggles; and speaking of them 
led on to a reminiscence of his further experiences. 
At the time of our conversation Mr. Howells was 
seventy-nine years old, and was still, as everyone 
knows, writing with all the vigor and grace of his 
earlier periods. 

"Some years ago," he began (of course, I give 
only the substance of what he said), "I was advised 
by a wise banker friend, who had my best interests 
at heart, to invest my savings in two houses in an 
excellent neighborhood on the West Side. I was 
sure then, and am still, that his advice was the best 
obtainable at that time. He told me that the income 
from the two houses would be a fine thing to have 
when I could no longer depend on my pen to sup- 
port me. I bought the two houses, and later bought 
one on my own initiative on the East Side. 

"I know nothing which illustrates the curious 
freaks of fortune that beset a small investor in New 
York real estate better than my experience. The 
house I bought for no reason in particular, except 
that it pleased my fancy, now just about pays for 
the expense of owning the other two." 

Then Mr. Howells's face lit up with that wonderful 
smile known to all who had the privilege of his 
friendship, as he said: "So I haven't given up my 
pen. When I was forty I said, ' At fifty I shall retire 
from the field'; at fifty I put it off until I should 
be sixty; at sixty I felt perhaps I might continue 

42 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

my work to the age of seventy-five; and now I look 
to eighty as perhaps a favorable time to cease writing 
— eighty, a fine round number, as one looks at it." 

But the old weaver of beautiful patterns never 
laid down the shuttle until three more years were 
added to the round number he had chosen for the 
finish of his task. 

The matter of visualizing characters in a novel 
is a very interesting one, and here is a story illus- 
trating it, which brings in one of the most extraor- 
dinary personalities of his day, Mark Twain. 

Mark Twain! It is difficult to think of him as 
Samuel Clemens; his pen name fitted him so much 
better. 

Frank Mayo had dramatized "Pudd'nhead Wil- 
son" while Mark Twain was abroad, and when 
Mark returned he went to see the play, occupying a 
box to the right of the stage. I was present, in the 
front row of the balcony, where I could see Mr. 
Clemens. The play, with Frank Mayo in the title 
role, was a great success. As scene after scene re- 
vealed the several characters Mark Twain became 
completely absorbed in watching them, and often 
appeared absolutely startled when one appeared on 
the stage for the first time. 

At the conclusion of the third act some one called 
on Mark Twain for a speech. Mr. Clemens arose 
and eulogized Mr. Mayo as author and actor, and 
included the whole company in the credit for what 
he described as one of the strangest and most com- 
plete illuminations of a text that he had ever wit- 
nessed. 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Then Prank Mayo was called on for a speech. He 
came forward from the flies at the left, looked over 
at Mr. Clemens, clasped both his hands together, 
and in pantomime shook hands with him. Then, 
pausing long enough to get the attention of the 
house, he looked quizzically at his audience and 
said, "Pudd'nhead Wilson is too wise to speak 
after Mark Twain !" 

The next day I met Mr. Clemens in the editorial 
rooms at Harpers'. He was full of the play. "Do 
you know," he said, "I had never visualized some 
of the characters in that story at all, and when they 
came out on the stage I did not recognize them at 
first ; but there they were in the flesh and blood, and 
I came to the conclusion that they must have 
looked like that and acted just so. It was one of 
the strangest experiences of my life to see my own 
creations acting independently of me." 

I asked Mr. Clemens what he thought of the 
sheriff. This part was played by a fat man who wore 
a pair of trousers that were a work of comic art. 
"He should be taken right out of this play and 
another one written around him," was the reply. 
"And the twins," he went on, "I hardly remembered 
the twins, but there they were, playing quite a part 
on the stage." 

It was always a delight to hear Mark Twain think 
aloud. Those who have seen him only in public 
have missed the best of him. If you were fortunate 
enough to sit down quietly with him for an hour 
you never could forget the new views of familiar 
things with which he would enrich your mind. 

44 



A WORLD- WORTH WHILE 

Nothing remained commonplace that was touched 
with the fire and light of his genius. 

Mark Twain had a hundred sides, and I rather 
imagine it annoyed him sometimes when people, 
who knew him only as the author of Innocents 
Abroad, expected him to make them laugh. 

Two ladies who moved in that society which is 
spelled with a large "S" had set their hearts on hav- 
ing a really amusing luncheon. They persuaded a 
gentleman who had some contact with their set, and 
also with the literary world, to arrange a luncheon 
party at the old downtown Delmonico's. Mark 
Twain was to be there — of course, he would be 
screamingly funny. In the innocence of their hearts 
the two ladies imagined that I, being a cartoonist, 
would cover the tablecloth with comic pictures. 
Hence I was invited. 

Never did I see a more solemn countenance than 
Mark Twain presented on that occasion. In vain 
our host laid snares for an opening joke. Mark 
began a dissertation on the nothingness of man — 
the cosmos, interstellar space, atomic theory — any- 
thing in the heavens above or in the waters under 
the earth, but nothing to do with anything on this 
green sphere. The two ladies listened with strained 
attention, waiting for the colossal joke which surely 
must be in course of preparation; but Mark Twain 
went on serenely through bouillon, fish, flesh, and 
fowl, with never a break in the monotonous flow of 
learned discourse. At last, worn out with hope 
deferred, the ladies turned to me — surely a car- 
toonist could say or do or draw something funny. 

45 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

But alas for their faith! Was I going to allow 
myself to be funnier than Mark Twain? And in his 
presence at that? Little did they know of profes- 
sional etiquette. And, besides, I was so convulsed 
with inward laughter at the wonderful discourse 
which Mark Twain was delivering and with his 
earnest manner, that I could scarcely keep a 
decent countenance. 

One of the ladies recovered sufficiently at parting, 
after the luncheon, to say to Mr. Clemens that she 
never had supposed he could be so funny. And he 
suavely replied that he could not very often. 



CHAPTER IV 

IN writing these rambling recollections of people 
and events that have played a part in my life I 
have begun in the middle. Let me now go back 
as far as I can remember, for there were interesting 
things going on when I was a small child, and pretty 
much everything we learn as we grow up comes to 
us in the form of a comparison with the few primal 
things we knew as children. 

The earliest thing I can recall is a playground 
about the gnarled roots of a giant oak. Its great 
mysterious shaft shot up through the leaves into the 
sky and disappeared. To that first impression of a 
great tree may be due a curious twist of my imagi- 
nation. To me personalities always resolve them- 
selves into terms of trees. The noblest character 
is always an oak, the strongest a hickory, the most 
elegant an elm, the affable a maple, and the weird 
or ghostly a sycamore. 

From under the giant oak I saw the first mobili- 
zation of troops before the Civil War, and from the 
top of a hill near by I saw the houses of our little 
town illuminated in honor of the laying of the first 
Atlantic cable. 

About this time, or perhaps a year later, I came 
in contact with the first man of national reputation 
whom I ever met. I can give the picture only as I 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

saw it then. He was a sturdy gentleman and was 
seated in my mother's parlor. His tall silk hat rested 
on a table beside him. I was keenly aware of that 
silk hat, also of his gold watch chain and his black- 
velvet waistcoat ornamented with small pink roses 
with green leaves. 

I was invited to sit on his knee, an invitation 
quickly accepted, as it gave me the opportunity to 
examine and touch with my fingers the pink roses 
and the gold watch chain. I am sorry I can give a 
no more accurate description of this gentleman, 
because he was then on the threshold of a great 
career. He and my father, previous to the latter's 
death in 1855, had practiced law in the circuit courts 
in Ohio together. His name was Salmon F. Chase. 

In 1861 came the Civil War and hard times. The 
big house we lived in had to go and we moved into 
a little cottage. It was there I heard from day to 
day the story of the war. For economy's sake our 
next-door neighbor and my mother together sub- 
scribed for the Cincinnati Gazette, and at about 
eleven o'clock each morning the daughter of our 
neighbor used to come to a stile which stood in the 
hedge that separated our dooryards and read to us 
the war news. I can see Miss Mary as she stood 
upon those wooden steps and read the daily record 
of our army's success or failure or of hope deferred. 

A young, handsome lad from Xenia, our nearest 

town, represented the Gazette at the front as a war 

correspondent. He wrote under the pen name of 

"Agate." His name was Whitelaw Reid. 

It was at the old stile I learned the history of the 

48 





THE "DAILY GRAPHIC" ROOM AT MOUQUIN-S 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Civil War. Confused it was — fragmentary, of course 
— but it got under the skin and it was burned in as 
no school-taught history ever was. I have seen the 
little circle gathered about those steps in the hot 
summer sun, when every nerve grew so tense that 
the only sound above a heartbeat was the voice of 
Miss Mary struggling to steady itself through words 
that carried the news of life and death. 

The three supreme days that will ever dwell in 
my mind were the three crucial days of Gettysburg. 
The news was meager, it was contradictory. On the 
third day of the battle I made my way to the rail- 
road station to fetch our paper. We received very 
little telegraphic news in those days outside of the 
papers; in fact, I think, none at all. A group of 
silent men and women waited at the station. As I 
look back on that day I can see the empty streets, 
deserted except for silent groups standing on the 
corners. It was the awful silence that sent a chill of 
fear through my heart. I remember that I could 
stand it no longer. I went up to an old man and 
asked him if there was any news. He looked at me 
and laid his hand on my head, but made no answer. 

I was still a very small boy when the news was 
flashed over the country of Lincoln's tragic end. 
Life from my earliest recollection had been one long 
series of dramatic happenings which now culminated 
in the death of their greatest figure. 

It is very often said in these days that it was not 
until many years after the Civil War that the 
greatness of Abraham Lincoln was appreciated, and 
that the veneration in which his name is now held 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

is of recent growth; but that is not according to 
my recollection. In my own home town in Ohio, 
at least, his death fell as a bereavement personal to 
every man, woman, and child. 

I say everyone, but in that little town there was 
an exception. The morning of Lincoln's death a 
number of us — just careless youngsters — were play- 
ing hide-and-seek in a lumberyard. The lumber 
stood in great piles in what remained of a walnut 
grove, each layer of boards separated from the next 
by two-inch sawed sticks. As we clambered about 
over the lumber piles we would cease every now 
and then from our play and some one would say 
in an awed whisper, "The President is dead!" 
There seemed something very dreadful to us in that 
thought, and we would all sit very still for a moment 
or two. 

One of the boys had just said this for the second 
or third time when the voice of a big, husky German 
workman (I am glad, at least, he was a German) 
shouted back: "And a goot chob, too! Serfed him 
right !" With one accord we armed ourselves with 
the two-inch sticks, which lay handy to our reach, 
and attacked that big fellow from all sides. 

We gave him a most unmerciful beating, and he 
escaped serious injury only by flight, bellowing 
threats as he ran. As a matter of fact, several of us 
got thrashings from him later; but never mind, he 
got his first! 

I was attending a little private school at that 
time, which, by the way, was kept by a young Ger- 
man woman who was a most excellent teacher, but 

50 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

a strong sympathizer with the South, where her peo- 
ple lived. She was what we called a "Copperhead" 
in Civil War times. But Miss Knaus had never 
expressed her sentiments at all freely, and up to the 
time of the assassination of Lincoln had never 
clashed with the popular feeling. On the day before 
the memorial services, which were to be held simul- 
taneously in all the towns in the United States, Miss 
Knaus made an announcement. She. called up all 
the classes (there were about fifty children in the 
school) and informed us that school would be held 
as usual the next morning, and that any scholar 
who absented himself or herself to attend the me- 
morial services would be expelled from the school. 

We were only little bits of children, but I can re- 
member the deep fire of indignation which ran 
through our hearts at her words. After school we 
all met out on the sidewalk and decided what we 
would do. It seems a very strange thing, as I look 
back on that time, to realize what we little folks 
determined on, there and then, without consulting 
any grown person. We decided to come to school at 
nine o'clock, as usual, the next morning, and when 
the church bell started to ring for the service at 
half past ten we were to rise from our seats, form in 
line, and march out of the schoolhouse and up to 
the church. 

The next morning we were, every one, at school 
promptly at nine o'clock. Each one of us wore a 
tiny tintype portrait of Abraham Lincoln, framed in 
gilt foil, on a crepe bow fastened on the left breast 
of his little jacket. These decorations won us black 
51 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

looks from our schoolmistress. However, we had 
come to school, and she felt she had won a victory. 
But, the spelling lesson over and an indifferent recita- 
tion in mental arithmetic completed, the solemn 
clang of the church bell rang out. It was like a call 
to arms. Up from our seats we sprang, and in an 
instant that little schoolroom was as full of elec- 
tricity as a dynamo room. Miss Knaus turned a 
deathly white and commanded us all to be seated. 
But we formed quietly in lines in the aisles and 
marched to the door. Our teacher made a dash 
to close it, but was too late. We larger boys — 
the oldest was about eleven years of age — put 
our backs against it until all the tiniest tots were 
safely out. 

The next day Miss Knaus was informed by our 
parents that she could take us all back or close her 
school, just as she pleased. She surrendered at dis- 
cretion, but her school dwindled away to nothing 
from that day forth. 

When I was a very little boy every youngster 

was brought up on Mayne Reid and Captain Mar- 

ryat. The generation before — poor souls! — were 

raised on the "Hollo" books, and the generation 

before that read "Sanford and Merton" for their 

sins. I learned to read rather early, and when not 

more than six or seven years old had spelled my way 

through several little books and had my eye fixed on a 

tale of South Africa, by Mayne Eeid. In this book 

was a picture of a lion coming up out of the chimney 

of a hut, smoke and flame pouring out around him. 

Before I had an opportunity to start reading this 

53 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

story the book mysteriously disappeared. My father 
had left us more books than money, a fine miscella- 
neous library, in fact, and I proceeded methodically 
to hunt for that lion through rows of books piled 
up on shelves to the ceiling. A small boy in quest 
of a picture-book lion has the patience of Job; 
day after day and month after month this particular 
one went through every book that had the least 
promise of a tion in it. 

Once he thought he had tracked the lion to his 
lair — Yaradee: A Plea for Africa, with his grand- 
father's initials on the flyleaf, looked promising. But 
his grandfather was one of the original abolitionists 
of the Garrison school, and Yaradee was a part of his 
propaganda. 

But, though the small boy hunted that elusive 
lion for several years and never found him, the 
quest was well worth the effort it cost. Seated on 
top of a stepladder, alongside of the bookshelves, 
he dipped, and sometimes deeply, into books that 
very few eight- or ten-year-old youngsters ever look 
into at all. He read all of Spenser's Faerie Queens 
from cover to cover. He read "The Tempest," 
hoping to see his lion spring out from behind the 
rock and eat old Caliban; he followed Orlando 
through the Forest of Arden. The trail grew very 
warm when Orlando's brother told Rosalind how 
Orlando had saved him from the lioness. 

Of course, in pursuing these side excursions from 
the main trail of his story-book lion the small boy 
frequently got lost. Much of the great literature he 
dipped into was to him but a labyrinth of words; 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

but, on the other hand, he never was told what to 
think of a passage, what to admire, or what was 
negligible. 

He read "The Tempest " only because he wished 
to; and if the Faerie Queens hadn't interested him 
and its peculiar rhythm hadn't fascinated him, he 
never would have made his way through those long 
volumes. 

Ever on the spoor of his lion, he waded through 
many a deep literary jungle and enjoyed books that 
are made a task and an abomination to many young 
minds through being put before them in the form of 
something to be learned. One day he discovered a 
treasure — it was in parts — issued as a subscription 
book. The letters were very queer and black and 
close together. They puzzled the small boy not a 
little, but by dint of comparing them over and over 
again with common print he learned at last to 
decipher them. 

Some of the words were as queer as the letters, 
but this book soon held more of a fascination than 
any other in the library. The hunter could some- 
times read a whole sentence, with only two or three 
strange words, and get the sense of these by the 
context. 

The part of the book he learned to read was 
called "The Nonne's Preeste's Tale." It was like a 
puzzle picture; often there were gaps in it as he 
put it together; and then a sudden light would fall 
on its meaning, and, while he never got the puzzle 
completed, he found in it a beautiful rhythm which 
stirred his imagination. The story of "Canticleere" 

54 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

was one no small boy could resist when once its 
black-letter shell was penetrated. 

But imagine setting a child of eight years the task 
of learning to read Chaucer in the "black letter"! 
It could hardly be done, and even though accom- 
plished, the child would hate his teacher and Chau- 
cer in about equal proportions. 

When I think of my vain struggles at school with 
another book called Stoddard's Mental Arithmetic, 
I am convinced that it is much easier to learn things 
when you do not have to. 

Here in facsimile are a couple of verses from "The 
Nonne's Preeste's Tale." It is easily to be seen how 
pleasing to a child it would be to discover this won- 
derful description of " Canticleere," the cock hidden 
away in black letter. 

Perhaps I have already intimated that I made 
an early entrance into the world of business. Some 
sympathetic soul may think it was a great hardship 
for a boy to go to work at the age of thirteen; but 
before any tears are shed over it allow me to tell just 
what a glorious job it was. I was made check clerk 
in the freight house of the C, S. & C. Railway of Ohio, 
and keeper of the "way-bill book." It was my duty 
to go over the freight yard and make a record of all 
the empty freight cars by number and telegraph this 
every night to the headquarters in Sandusky. 

Imagine a boy of thirteen sitting in the cab of a 

switch engine, ringing the engine bell, at about the 

hour when his best pals were just coming home from 

school every afternoon loaded down with Stoddard's 

Mental Arithmetic and Green's Analysis of Gram- 

65 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

mar and geographies and slates! That was part of 
my job as I numbered the empty cars — and I was 
being paid for it, when every boy in town would 
have put up all his taffy and ju-ju paste for the 
privilege of being in my place. — 

And then I knew the engineer of the switch engine 
and could call him Hank, and the fireman, Mike 
Burke, was my dear friend. Mike had bushy red 
hair and a little mustache which he curled up at 
the ends, and when Hank was off duty at noon Mike 
used to run the switch engine down to the high- 
school crossing, where the schoolgirls passed at about 
that time on their way to lunch. 

Mike would blow off steam, give a toot or two on 
the whistle, hang out of the cab window, and curl 
his mustache. But a locomotive was not such a 
loadstone to the schoolgirl as it was to the school- 
boy, and Mike, it seemed to me, wasted a good deal 
of energy at this crossing. 

Mike had worked as a "scroll artist" before he 
became a fireman. He used to paint scrolls and little 
landscapes on threshing machines — and he was clever 
at it. He and I used to climb up from the top of a 
box car into a loft over the freight office, and up 
there we practiced drawing scrolls with red chalk on 
the plaster walls. 

There were several of those "scroll artists" in the 

town. One of them was an old German who wore a 

rusty cloak with a red lining, let his hair grow long 

over his shoulders, and seemed to imagine he was a 

real artist. Maybe he was in his heart, poor old chap! 

Then there was another, who had a shock of black 

56 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

curly hair which he oiled prodigiously. He wore a 
pair of fierce mustachios and a goatee, and was 
suspected of using ivory black on them to hide the 
frosts of time. On Saturday afternoons he used to 
appear on the streets in an immaculate suit of white 
duck and a big gray sombrero which he wore with a 
tremendous swagger. He, too, appeared to imagine 
that he was a real artist, yet I fear he was mistaken. 

If this were an autobiography I should not be able 
to skip so easily from one period to another, but in 
writing about "worth-white" people I have known it 
is permissible to turn back the hands of the clock 
and begin over again when the occasion calls for it. 
As I have said in a former chapter, the Hancock 
campaign was the beginning of my work as a car- 
toonist in Harper's Weekly. But more than ten years 
before, when I was a boy of fourteen, I made a 
short series of cartoons in Dayton, Ohio, which I 
believe were the first cartoons ever syndicated in 
this country. They were two columns in size, drawn 
on wood with pen-and-ink, and were engraved by 
Daniel Auchey. These little political cartoons were 
syndicated in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois among the 
small country newspapers. I have an idea that they 
were pretty crude specimens of the art of cartooning. 

Two years afterward I went to work in the en- 
graving house of Bogart & Stillman in Cincinnati. 
The engravers employed there looked down from a 
lofty height on the youngsters who were learning to 
be mere draftsmen. They designated us as "goats" 
— and not so inappropriately, either, for our prin- 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

cipal duty seemed to be to carry boxwood blocks 
all over Cincinnati. "Jim" Wales and I were the 
principal "goats" at that time. Jim afterward 
joined the staff of Puck and made some famous 
cartoons for that paper. 

I lived, while in Cincinnati, in an enormous, 
rambling old mansion, very much dilapidated, which 
was attached to the steep side of Mount Adams 
much after the fashion of a mud wasp's nest. One 
side of the house was one story in height, the other 
side three stories. 

In it was gathered a curious company: a young 
coal merchant with a fancy for private theatricals 
and several young fellows, clerks and what not, 
ready for any amusement. There were also several 
young women employed in shops, an old lady who 
had been on the stage and knew all its traditions, 
and a young woman about twenty years of age of 
very distinguished appearance, who was making a 
serious study of dramatic art. The basement of this 
old mansion contained one enormous room with a 
brick floor and a great fireplace. To this room we 
used to repair after dinner and, on an improvised 
stage, a dozen or more of the lodgers rehearsed little 
scenes from the old comedies and farces. 

The coal merchant was a rather clever actor, and 
I remember some well-acted scenes between him and 
the young girl with stage ambitions, coached by the 
old actress. 

Some of the women in the house, whose talents 
ran more to gossip than to acting, used to question 
the mode of life of the young woman, and took 

58 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

pains to draw attention to the fact that she had no 
very visible means of support. But there was about 
her such an air of good breeding and earnestness 
that no one dared openly say a word in her disfavor. 

To be sure, she frequently disappeared for a day; 
and occasionally at night a telegram would come for 
her and she would instantly take her leave for the 
time being, going off alone on some errand known 
only to herself. She was a woman of mystery and 
also of very great talent, and for the one reason as 
much, perhaps, as for the other she appealed strongly 
to the chivalry of a sixteen-year-old boy. 

One night, after many rehearsals, we gave a little 
play. Our audience, which consisted of the neigh- 
bors and the servants, was pleased with the per- 
formance. Our twisted, rheumatic old cook was so 
enthusiastic that she danced an Irish jig on the 
hearth after it was over, and just then a messenger 
boy came in with a telegram for our leading lady. 

She left for her room immediately, and a few 
minutes later I met her in the hall, where she called 
me aside and asked me if I would do her a favor. 
She had to go to the other end of the city and to 
cross through a very tough quarter on her way. 
Would I accompany her? Would I travel at mid- 
night into the land of mystery which surrounded 
■ her? I was ready in a moment. We caught a street 
car which made its crooked way through various 
streets, past the old Longworth mansion and up 
Fourth Street; then another car, and then a walk 
through the part of town which she feared to cross 
alone. I think it was called the Mill River district, 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

and it was certainly at that hour a dark and dismal 
place to traverse. 

Up to this time my lady of mystery had said very 
little; nothing, in fact, of her destination or the 
object of our expedition, and I asked no questions. 
But now she turned to me and said: "I am afraid 
when you see where I am going you will think me a 
horrible sort of person. Of course, you must have 
heard some of the gossip that goes on at the house. 
Nobody there knows what I do for a living, and that 
doesn't prevent unkind surmises. Perhaps if they 
really knew, the comments would be more unkind still. 

"When we get into the better neighborhood before 
us, I go to a house where there is black crfepe and a 
white ribbon on the door. A tiny baby has just 
died there and my work is to dress it, to surround 
it with flowers, to make the last view its mother 
has of it a beautiful memory. My work comes to 
me through the florists. To some people it might 
seem a ghoulish business; certainly, it is a strange 
occupation for a woman who aspires to play comedy." 

We were through the worst part of our journey 
now, and, after climbing a long hill, arrived at the 
house of mourning, where I left milady at the door. 
Many times afterward I fancied that I saw a resem- 
blance in some clever actress on the stage to this 
extraordinary girl, but the camouflage of make-up 
and stage names concealed her always if by chance 
it were she. 

A few months spent as a "goat" in the engraVing 
office convinced me that I was in the wrong place to 
pick up an art education and I shifted my line of 

60 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

endeavor to the Worcester Technical Institute. A 
vacation job brought me into New York just in 
time to witness the riots of July 12, 1871. After 
periods of peace and quiet lasting many years, law 
and order in New York have a habit of being tem- 
porarily suspended now and then by serious frays 
between the authorities and the rough element. 
There has usually been no one set of lawbreakers 
responsible for these outbreaks; but let an occasion 
arise where any set of citizens becomes discontented 
or displeased with the way it is governed, or where 
prejudice of race or religion is stirred, and a turbu- 
lent minority seems always ready and waiting to- 
take advantage of the chance to try conclusions with 
the city or state authorities. In the Macready riots 
on May 10, 1849, in Astor Place, the mob was prob- 
ably composed, three-quarters at least, of people 
who had but a very hazy notion of what they were 
fighting about. Nevertheless, the riot became a 
serious one. Before it was quelled by the Seventh 
Regiment one hundred and forty-one members of 
that regiment were wounded and many of the 
rioters were killed. Everyone knows of the draft 
riots during the Civil War, on which occasion the 
city was in a state of anarchy for several days. 

On July 1, 1871, I arrived in New York to make 
working drawings in a chandelier factory on Tenth 
Avenue. I went to live with the superintendent of 
the factory in his house on Twenty-fourth Street, 
only a few doors west of Eighth Avenue. New York 
was a great, mysterious place to me and I was des- 
tined very soon to see it in its most sinister mood. 

61 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

0n the morning of July 12th I went to my work 
on Tenth Avenue at the corner of Twenty-fourth 
Street. We had all heard that a parade of Orange- 
men was to start down Eighth Avenue during the 
morning, and it was rumored there would be trouble 
when they arrived at the lower end of the avenue. 
No one, however, had the least idea that there would 
be any serious attack on the procession in our " up- 
town" neighborhood, as we called Twenty-fourth 
Street in those days. 

But suddenly we heard numerous stray shots 
fired, and then a volley. The superintendent rushed 
into the department where I was at work and shouted 
that the firing was at the Twenty-fourth Street 
corner, only a few rods from his home. 

He and I immediately proceeded up Twenty- 
fourth Street. At Ninth Avenue we were held up 
a moment by a policeman, but, in the rush of people 
fleeing from Eighth Avenue, we slipped by and 
pushed and jostled our way through the crowd 
until we arrived at the house. 

There we found the doors barricaded. Apparently 
no harm had come to the superintendent's family, 
who were in the house. 

Shots were being fired from the housetops down 
into Eighth Avenue, but the militia — Jim Fisk's 
regiment — were standing quietly in the middle of 
the avenue. My companion, who was a cool- 
headed person, led the way to the corner, advising 
me, as we went along, to say nothing to anyone, to 
ask or answer no questions — mighty good advice, 

too, it was. 

62 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

When we arrived on the avenue, in fact before 
we turned out of Twenty-fourth Street, we saw dead 
and wounded men being dragged away by friends, 
often with deep curses muttered at the soldiers. I 
remember that at the corner where the crowd was 
thickest I stumbled over the body of a poor fellow 
who had been shot at such close range that he was 
almost blown to pieces. 

We walked up to Twenty-eighth Street without 
being molested, although every now and then could 
be heard the bark of a pistol from the top of a house 
on the east side of the avenue. I had no means of 
knowing how many volleys had been fired by the 
soldiers, but evidently one at least had been fired 
over the heads of the crowd, for the red-brick houses 
along the avenue were clipped, where the bullets 
had struck, up to the top floors. 

So far as I know, no accurate casualty list of that 
riot has ever been published. In fact, I do not be- 
lieve the figures are known. The friends of the 
dead and wounded undoubtedly tried to conceal 
their losses under the guise of sickness and natural 
death. It was believed at the time that one hundred 
people lost their lives, but this was probably an 
exaggerated estimate. 

It was a terrible introduction which I had to New 

York, but sad and gruesome as were the happenings 

on July 12, 1871, they ended from that day to this 

the idea of mob rule in New York. A curious af ter- 

effect of my experience that morning on Eighth 

Avenue was the reaction in the evening. All day 

while the excitement lasted I felt, boylike, a very 

63 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

brave person; but when night fell and the streets 
were deserted and all was unwontedly still, I became 
suddenly panic-stricken, hauled my bureau about, 
and barricaded my door with it, closed the window 
tight, although it was a hot, stifling night, pulled 
the covers over my head, and lay awake until long 
past midnight, frightened at I knew not what. 

New York when I first saw it seemed an enormous 
city, with more people within its borders than it 
could well take care of; and yet, compared with the 
city of to-day it was but a village, or at most an 
association of several villages considerably scattered. 
There has always been to me something very real 
and very terrible in the personality of the city itself, 
apart from the individuals who compose its citizen- 
ship. I have seen it as a great serpent lazily basking 
in the sun by the sea, apparently motionless, un- 
changeable, yet silently growing, until with a great 
throe it sheds its ancient skin and rises up finer, with 
the light playing on new and shining surfaces. 

The old serpent has shed its skin many times since 
I made its acquaintance. Think of rocky cliffs cov- 
ered with squalid and ramshackle shanties extending 
from Thirty-fourth Street northward to the Park 
and from that oasis westward as far, in many places, 
as the North River. 

Harlem seemed as far away then as Poughkeepsie 
does now; stages were the only means of transit up 
and down town, with the exception of two or three 
horse-car lines; an elevated line had been started 
and was a failure! 

That was the dreadful brownstone age of house 

64 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

architecture and the cast-iron age of business con- 
struction; the period of the jerky cable line down 
Broadway and of the two-dollar derby hat. 

Sixth Avenue was then the dry-goods and general- 
store district — where prices and business began at 
last to languish. The exodus to Fifth Avenue, where 
prices caught their second wind, was still in the 
unsuspected future. 

It took a long time to cover with a new skin that 
part of the old serpent's body which lay between 
Fourteenth and Twenty-third streets. But that was 
only a small patch, which counted for little. Mean- 
while the silent, inevitable expansion ceaselessly 
went on. Whole streets of glittering playhouses 
came into being — the moving picture, the dazzling 
electric sign, the diabolical taxi, the jammed and 
crowded subway, tunnels, bridges, and bandits. 
The glorious old ophidian before long outgrew the 
island of Manhattan and with one great convolution 
cast his coils over Kings and Queens and Richmond 
and the Bronx. Now he rears his golden head above 
all the world in the peerless Wool worth Tower! 

I cannot say that life between the North and East 

rivers is as comfortable as it was some years ago. 

There is not much room left for us poor mortals! 

We are squeezed into the corners or off the island 

entirely. The great city is admirable to look upon; 

yet in our own little homely way we miss the old 

Grapevine Inn, the seventy-five-cent table d'hSte, 

room to get about on streets unscented by the 

muffler's fumes, the hansom cab, and the two-dollar 

derby, 

65 



CHAPTER V 

IN 1907 I wrote the following account for an 
anniversary number of Harper's Weekly. It 
commences the story of how I played hooky 
while a "cub artist" on the Weekly staff. 

Pretty nearly every man in the world can remem- 
ber the time when he succumbed to the lure of the 
fishing pole, the circus, or the old swimming hole, 
and played hooky from school. Consequently I feel 
assured of sympathetic readers for tjiis chapter, at 
any rate. 

In order to tell the story of my runaway assignment as a 
"special artist" for Harper's Weekly, it will be necessary to give 
a glimpse of the old art department as it existed under the 
supervision of Charles Parsons, a man of fine intellect and wide 
sympathy and discernment. 

He did for the men who came under his influence pretty much 
what Mr. Belasco has done for the people whom we now know 
as stellar lights in theatrical skies. He picked out with unerring 
judgment the points of excellence of each raw recruit and cul- 
tivated those qualities with sedulous care. 

In those days news events were illustrated through the medium 
of drawings on wood, which had then to be slowly and labori- 
ously cut, line for line and tint for tint, by skillful engravers. 
This necessitated a division of labor by both artists and en- 
gravers in order to prepare the plates in time for the day of 
publication. After an outline had been made by one of the 
artists, the block was taken apart into as many, perhaps, as 
pieces, and each man given his portion to work on. 

66 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

sounds like a very mechanical, inartistic way to produce a 
picture, but it was on such work as this that Edwin A. Abbey, 
Arthur B. Frost, Charles S. Reinhart, and a score of others 
whose names are household words received much of their early 
training. Of course, all these men were working outside the 
art department, from nature, whenever the opportunity offered, 
but the interchange of ideas and of methods, as the little blocks 
were passed backward and forward from one man to another, 
were invaluable to the young artist. 

Then with it all and through it all were the guiding words of 
advice and experience from Mr. Parsons. I have often com- 
pared the outcome of this method of work to the excellent results 
obtained by the old-fashioned crossroads school, where all the 
young scholars hear the older ones recite their lessons, and 
thus, if at all alert, learn half their next year's tasks in advance. 
So it was that I had the inestimable privilege of hearing and see- 
ing Mr. Abbey "recite." Although a very young man at that 
time, he was beginning to do his great work on the Herrick 
series, yet he did not hesitate to lend a helping hand at a "news' 9 
block when he was needed. As I said before, Mr. Parsons had 
a faculty of finding out a raw recruit's good points, and, as I 
thought at the time, he most unfortunately discovered that I 
could draw very round wheels, and I saw myself in danger of 
being handed down to posterity as the wheelwright of Harper's 
Weekly. I was kept at the most grinding mechanical work by 
that dear and wise old man for what seemed to me an intermi- 
nable period. Once in a long time I was permitted to go out and 
try my wings; but after a flap or two I was back at my wheels 
or far-off crowds or architectural detail. 

My first assignment of any importance came during the 
administration of President Hayes. I was sent to Minneapolis 
to portray the incidents of his visit to a state fair held there in 
the late summer of 1878. This I did to the best of my ability, 
and was preparing regretfully to return to New York when a 
card was handed me at my hotel, inviting me to call at the offices 
of one of the directors of the fair. 

At the address given I found a grizzled old soldier. His first 
words sent a tingle of blood to my finger tips, "Young man, 

67 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

how would you like to see the real Northwest?" Then he con- 
tinued: ''You are a long way from New York. Why not go a 
little farther? With that pencil of yours you can make a record 
of your trip which will be very valuable not only to you, but 
to the country through which you travel." This is about all I 
recollect of his conversation, except that, when I replied I 
should have to write to Messrs. Harper & Brothers for permis- 
sion, the old gentleman sat up, looked me straight in the eye, 
and said: "If you want to go, telegraph them you are going. 
Come in and see me to-morrow." 

I went out of that office with visions of the wild life of the 
plains dazzling my sight. But then the call of duty came, cold, 
severe, "Back to the round wheels, back to the grind of Frank- 
lin Square." Still, New York was a long way off. I stood at the 
gates of the Northwest, and the old soldier was holding them ajar. 

Promptly at the opening of business hours on the next morning 
I appeared at the old gentleman's office. He was expecting me 
and he asked no questions. Instead, he handed me several large 
envelopes which he said contained letters to commanders of mili- 
tary posts, owners of stage routes, post traders, and so forth. 
"You needn't bother looking them over now, " he said; "but they 
may be good things to have with you later on." Then he went 
over a map with me, showing the "Bad Lands" of the Upper 
Missouri and the then new country of Manitoba, with its great 
lakes and rivers, and its Hudson's Bay posts with headquarters 
at Fort Garry. 

I started next day. Twice in my subsequent 
wanderings a telegram, covered with mysterious 
signs of forwarding and receipt, caught up with me. 
Under all the hieroglyphics I could dimly see the 
words, "Come back at once. Harper & Brothers/* 
But the spell of the wilderness was on me and I 
only replied, " Please send me one hundred dollars." 

My route lay over the then recently constructed 
Northern Pacific Railroad to Bismarck, North 
Dakota, which was in 1878 the "jumping -off place 

68 



99 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

for travel into the Northwest. The old famous Dead- 
wood stage ran from Bismarck down into the Black 
Hills, and this route was usually preferred to a rival 
line from Cheyenne, for the reason that the manager 
of the Deadwood line was reported to be paying 
the chief of a band of "road agents" who infested 
that territory a salary to confine his attentions to 
conveyances using the other route. 

While in Bismarck I wrote a letter to Mr. Parsons. 
In a paraphrased extract from it I may be able to 
give some impression of a typical Western town of 
those crude times. 

In a frontier town the "opera house" is a very important 
institution; and Bismarck in 1878 boasted a combination under 
one roof of courtroom, faro bank, saloon, and theater. 

It was thus that without undue exertion one could litigate, 
speculate, "irrigate," or be entertained, according to his tastes 
or needs. Perhaps the most useful of the four divisions of this 
municipal building was the theater. 

The courtroom furnished material for contention, and the 
faro bank was not far behind it in this respect. Contention in 
those days led to gun-play, and the saloon furnished inflam- 
mable material which often flared up and set off a good deal of 
gunpowder. But the theater let down the tension of those 
strenuous times and promoted peace and good-fellowship. 
Bismarck was perhaps the first place where the drama was ele- 
vated through the co-operation of the best citizens. When 
performers were scarce the district attorney would leave the 
legal atmosphere of the courtroom and give an excellent per- 
formance on the trapeze. 

The first night I attended the show two men came in who 
seemed to be bosom friends. One was small and slight, the 
other a tall, burly fellow. The big man was under sentence of 
death by hanging; the other was the sheriff. It was due to the 
influence of the district attorney that the condemned man was 

69 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

allowed the liberty of the theater — not that there was any 
maudlin sympathy for the prisoner, but because the little sheriff 
had no safe place to leave him while attending the show. 

Although normally the theater was a factor for keeping the 
peace in Bismarck, yet a few days after I arrived in town a prac- 
tical joker* (may his tribe decrease) made the Bismarck Opera 
House the cause of the next thing to a riot. One of the regular 
patrons of the theater was one Shang, a bad man with a record 
like an undertaker's. He had his regular seat about halfway 
between the door and the stage. It happened that on this 
occasion a girl just from Chicago, who knew no one in Bismarck, 
was to appear for the first time. The town practical joker had 
written a song for her which reflected on the family history of a 
Mr. Shang, and she, entirely innocent of any idea that such a 
man as Shang existed in the flesh, came out and sang it at the 
top of her voice. 

From a raised seat near the door I saw Shang rise as the song 
ended and walk out into the saloon, which was also the foyer of 
the theater. The proprietor was behind the bar. I followed 
Shang out and heard him say with a smile, "That's a fine singer 
you've got from Chicago!" And as he said it, with his left hand 
he grasped the big man's right and pulled him forward across 
the bar. Then with his right Shang picked up a heavy beer 
mug and gave the bartender a crashing blow in the face that 
dropped him behind the counter. With that Shang disappeared 
into the street. 

I went back to my seat, and in a couple of minutes the stage 
manager came to the footlights, cast hasty glances over his 
shoulder, and announced that, "owing to a slight misunderstand- 
ing with Mr. Shang," the performance would close. 

As he said it, out went the lights on the stage. In less than 
a moment the whole place was in total darkness. Fortunate 
indeed it was that Shang had come unarmed; but at the time 
no one knew that and everyone expected to see the company 
shot up at the stage door. The crowd rushed around there, 
but nothing happened beyond Shang's declared ultimatum that 
the opera house was to close its doors. 

For two days the proprietor of the opera house nursed a pair 

70 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of black eyes and declined to take any chances of further damage. 
Then the leading citizens of Bismarck got together at the hotel 
bar and declared the town should not longer bear the disgrace 
of being bulldozed by one man, "bad" or otherwise. 

A dodger was printed, stating that the opera house would 
open that night and that "Dotty Dolores, the Belle Canto 
of Chicago," would sing a new song especially composed for the 
occasion. 

Promptly at eight o'clock the entire male population of Bis- 
marck filed into the opera house. Mr. Shang was there and 
took his accustomed seat. The amount of arms and ammuni- 
tion in that hall would have made a respectable showing in an 
armory. Being about the only person present without a gun, 
I discreetly seated myself near the door. 

The curtain was rung up on an empty stage. There was a 
moment of dead silence, with all eyes wandering from the stage 
to Shang and back; then Dotty Dolores appeared attired in a 
short black spangled dress; she carried in front of her a little 
wooden stand which she set down in the middle of the stage 
and then disappeared behind the scenes. 

In a moment she reappeared. In each hand she held an enor- 
mous horse pistol. She advanced and laid them crossed on the 
little table. "My name is Dotty Dolores/' she declared, "and 
here I take my stand! I'm going to sing a song about what I 
please and who I please, and if Mr. Shang doesn't like it, he 
knows" — and here she picked up and flourished the horse 
pistols — "he knows what he will get!" 

The old wheezy piano started up and Dotty Dolores sang 
her song. Of course, it entirely avoided any reference to Mr. 
Shang's family tree, but when Dotty finished there was an al- 
most imperceptible pause. Everyone looked at Shang; the girl's 
pluck appealed to him and he led the applause. 

It was less than two years previous to my visit to 
Bismarck that Custer's little band had been anni- 
hilated by the warriors of Sitting Bull not so many 
miles away in the valley of the Little Big Horn. 
Many of the officers and men under the command 

71 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of Major Reno on that fateful day were still stationed 
at the Standing Rock post (afterward Fort Yates), 
which was reached by a drive of seventy-five miles 
out into the Bad Lands from Bismarck. 

I was fortunate enough to secure a "lift" in an 
army ambulance going to the post. Reno himself, 
I soon discovered, was stationed elsewhere; and it 
was well that he was, for the feeling against him on 
account of his failure to go to Custer's support was 
bitter as death itself. One and all felt that 
Reno had disgraced himself and that some part of 
his disgrace had undeservedly fallen upon their 
shoulders. 

No more devoted and heroic band of men ever 
wore the uniform of the United States than the offi- 
cers and men of our Regular Army in those days of 
Indian warfare. They stood between the Indian, 
ever retreating westward, and the irresistible tide of 
migration of the white races from the overcrowded 
East. They were far kinder and more merciful to 
the red man than were the civilians, but it was their 
misfortune to have to repress outbreaks by the 
savages, whether justified or not, to bear all the 
brunt of the fighting, and often take the blame for 
actions forced upon them by fate and fate's immuta- 
ble decrees. I hope some day a writer of the caliber 
of a John Fiske, if such there may be, will rise up 
and give to these men the glorious place in history 
which they deserve. It needs only the simple record 
of the truth, for their deeds will shine by their own 
light. 

In the evenings at Standing Rock we would repair 

72 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

to a little log hut which the officers had dubbed 
"the club/' There they would play dominoes or 
poker, and occasionally one of the young lieuten- 
ants, newly arrived from West Point, would play the 
banjo or sing. The conversation was usually about 
the routine of the day, and in the early part of an 
evening the subject of the Big Horn battle was 
carefully avoided; but before the night was over it 
was certain to crop out, and, once out, it became 
the all-absorbing topic of conversation. At times I 
could see that to some of these men the tension was 
greater than they could bear. One officer in par- 
ticular, a fine, high-strung, sensitive fellow, would 
sometimes fall into a curious morose state and leave 
the club in silence. One night at midnight an old 
sergeant in charge of the stables came to the par- 
ticular hut in "Slabtown" where I lodged and 
reported to my host that Lieutenant So-and-so had 
saddled his horse and started off across the plains. 

"I didn't like to report it, sir," he said to the 
captain, "but I was afraid something might happen 
to him." Morning came and guard mount, and the 
lieutenant had not returned. We got out our horses, 
half a dozen of us, and started off into the Bad 
Lands in search of him, dividing into two parties, 
for in that fantastically eroded country there were 
no roads, with the exception of a scarcely visible 
wagon trail which the stage traversed three times a 
week on its route to Bismarck. 

I remember that ride very clearly and painfully, 
for to my lot fell a rough-gaited horse and a McClel- 
lan saddle belonging to a short, fat quartermaster 

73 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

who had very tiny feet. The wooden stirrups were 
closed in, and with my knees up almost even with 
the horse's back, and only the tips of my toes in the 
stirrups, riding in a rough country was anything 
but sport. At the same time I did not dare dismount 
to adjust my stirrups for fear of losing sight of my 
companions who were riding ahead of me. 

We rode hard all morning, jumping dry gullies 
and sliding down steep banks, a trick at which those 
Western horses are very clever, until at just about 
noon a shout from an officer who was a little distance 
in advance drew our attention. He was pointing to 
something above us and to the left. There at the 
very highest point on the edge of a tremendous 
crag our lost lieutenant sat upon his horse silhouetted 
against the sky. 

The three of us gathered in a group to consult as 
to just what to do, now that we had sighted him. 
We had our doubts about his mental condition and 
feared to ride within hailing distance. There was no 
telling what he might do if we shouted to him. 
While we were endeavoring to think of some plan 
of approach he evidently espied us and, waving his 
hand, turned his horse about and took a trail invisible 
to us which led down the cliffside. 

In a few minutes he rode up to us, calm and smil- 
ing. He had "ridden it out." Nothing was said by 
anyone except a greeting as of men who had met 
on a morning ride. We made a detour to the south- 
ward, picked up the rest of our party, and, with my 
stirrup straps lengthened at last, arrived at the post 
before sundown. 

74 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

One of the unwritten laws in the West in those days 
was never to ask a man where he came from or what 
brought him there; and I was very careful to 
observe this rule, because the West had few laws, 
and what there were seemed founded on very good 
grounds. 

One day I met a man who was running a steam 
sawmill at the post, and after a few days I noticed 
that he made every endeavor to talk with me when- 
ever I met him. He was a rather curious-looking 
person and had the appearance of a man of good 
breeding considerably disguised by drink and care- 
less habits. I made up my mind that running a 
sawmill engine had never been his calling in the 
East. He had a habit of taking off his hat every 
few minutes and running his hands through his hair 
until it stood out all over his head like that of the 
"Circassian beauty" in a side show. His eyes were 
generally bloodshot, and altogether he was not a 
man I should have chosen as a comrade. Still, he 
seemed to have picked me out as a valued acquaint- 
ance and I had to treat him with a semblance of 
consideration. 

One evening after dinner I stepped out of the 
old shed in which I was quartered, thinking to go 
over to the club. I found my friend the engineer 
waiting for me. He proposed that we take a walk 
over to the home of an old Indian woman who lived 
down on the banks of the Missouri, just outside the 
reservation. 

This woman was a really fine character. She was 

the widow of an old French trader and had on more 

75 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

than one occasion prevented attacks on the whites 
by her own people. She had several daughters who 
were educated and refined women. I was very glad 
of a chance to see this household, so we set out over 
the hills at twilight, avoiding the Indian villages on 
account of the dogs, and arrived after a four-mile 
walk at one of the most curious homes it was ever 
my good luck to visit. The house, built of cotton- 
wood logs and adobe, nestled in what they call a 
"draw" in the West. In part it was a dugout, several 
of the rooms running well back into the bluff. 

The moon was coming up when we arrived, and 
its silver track could be seen on the river below. 
The house was so much a part of the bluff that it 
looked small in the half light, but on entering we 
were, to our surprise, taken through several good- 
sized rooms and* passageways into the principal 
living room. 

We were received by the Indian woman's eldest 
daughter, who had come from her home in St. Louis 

on a visit to her mother. Mrs. D , the daughter, 

was a graduate of an Eastern college and had the 
well-bred manner of a woman used to the refine- 
ments of civilization. Her mother, dressed in full 
Indian costume, greeted us pleasantly and called a 
woman servant in Indian dress to take our hats. 

The daughter showed the Indian strain of blood 
so little that it was impossible to realize we were 
not in an Eastern drawing-room, until her young 
sister, a girl of sixteen, came in. She was fresh from 
an Eastern boarding school and had every little air 
and grace of a white schoolgirl of that age — all that 

76 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

exaggeration of "grown-up" mannerisms which 
very young girls affect — but she was pure Indian in 
type. Her hair was intensely black and straight, her 
complexion dark, and her eyes contained fathomless 
depths. 

Mrs. D had inherited from her French father 

a faculty of brilliant wit. It was curious to note 
how it supplemented the peculiar quality of the 
Indian mind, which, as I have often found, is full of 
a deep satirical humor. The full-blood Indian 
mother was reputed to be a rich woman. She still 
carried on the trading business established by her 
French husband, and my real business out there that 
night was to purchase some Indian beadwork and 
costumes. I succeeded in getting, among other 
things, a Sioux bead belt of great beauty and some 
handsome moccasins. 

I had noticed that my companion was very rest- 
less during the evening. His nerves seemed to be 
jumping in a very uncomfortable way and he ran 
his bony fingers through his hair more frequently 
than ever. I put it all to the credit, or discredit, of 
drink; but whatever the cause, I felt sorry for the 
poor fellow. However, we had not gone far on our 
way back to the post when he almost collapsed. 

I was afraid I should not be able to get him home. 
His trouble seemed to be as much mental as physical, 
for he mumbled incessantly to himself and at last 
turned to me and said, in a curious, harsh tone, "I 
have gone as far as I can go." 

We sat down in the moonlight on the edge of a 

dry gully, and it was so still I could hear the labored 

77 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

breathing of the poor, .shaking man beside me. I 
felt a great pity for him and started to express my 
sympathy, when he held up his hand and in the 
same strained, harsh tone said: 

"Don't say a word to me. I have gone as far as 
I can. I must talk. I haven't dared say a word to 
a soul in seven months. I've got to talk! 

" I've been studying you ever since you came here. 
I trust you, boy; but, trust you or not, I've gone as 
far as I can go. By God! I've got to tell it! I'm 
out here because seven months ago in Chicago I 
killed a man! Yes, by the God above ! I killed him — 
after he drove me to it! And over and over I go 
through it again. Every night I see it all, and his 
face turned up toward the sky that he couldn't see!" 

He sat there clasping his hands together, and then, 
clenching his fists above his head, rocking his body 
to and fro. 

It is a strange thing how one's standards of ab- 
stract right and wrong all fall down when one's 
human side is directly appealed to. I suppose I 
should have been shocked and horrified at the crime 
this poor, shivering wretch had committed, but I 
remember well how we sat there for an hour like 
two brothers, my arm around his bent shoulders, 
while he poured out his story in all its detail. 

It was a terrible story and it has no place here; 
but the telling of it then perhaps saved that poor 
fellow's reason. 

I do not know that he was justified at all in that 
killing — I rather doubt it — but if the suffering of the 
damned could expiate a crime, his punishment was 

78 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

sufficient. My place, it seemed to me that night, 
was to do all I could to help a tortured soul. 

About one o'clock we passed the sentry at the 
post and my companion, greatly calmed, bade me 
good night and we parted. I carried my Indian 
belt and moccasins, which I had slung over my 
shoulder, to my quarters. In order to avoid waking 
the two officers who slept there I opened the door 
very quietly, but no sound was so light as to escape 
the ears of the great mastiff which was owned by 
one of them and had acquired the habit of sleeping 
under my cot. Entering the door in the half light, 
I saw his great body hurtling toward me as he sprang 
for my throat. 

Instantly I realized that it was the smell of the 
Indian stuff on my shoulder that had enraged him, 
and, throwing it in the air, I ducked low just as the 
great beast sank his teeth into the belt. I called 
him by name and he instantly recognized me, but 
he slunk back under the bed still growling as the 
hated scent continued to reach his sensitive nostrils. 
I thanked my stars that I had not followed a whim- 
sical notion to put the belt on. 



CHAPTER VI 

FOR three weeks I had lived the life of "Slab- 
town," the candid name given in those days 
to the officers' quarters at Fort Yates. The 
enlisted men lived in neat shingle-roofed barracks, 
but the officers were quartered in a lot of slab- 
walled, mud-roofed sheds, any one of which would 
have been condemned as unfit shelter for an army 
mule. 

"Slab town" with all its drawbacks had afforded 
me the finest hospitality. My corner in the quarter- 
master's house was dry except in heavy rains, and 
the great mastiff which slept under my cot con- 
tributed a feeling of security not to be despised. 
Now I had already bidden good-by to my kind hosts. 
The Bad Lands "stage," an open, two-seated mail 
wagon, was to stop for me at daybreak and carry 
me the seventy miles back to Bismarck, from which 
place I intended taking a railway train eastward to 
Fargo, thence to descend the Red River of the North 
to Fort Garry. 

I seemed to have just fallen asleep when a great 

heave of the faithful backbone underneath my bed, 

followed by a deep growl, brought me sharply to 

myself. Outside, some one was tapping lightly on 

the window. I got up quickly and, with the hound 

at my heels, went to the door. There I found the 

80 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

stage driven He apologized for his untimely visit 
(it was just midnight), but wanted to know if I 
would mind, "as a great favor and to lift a good 
man outer a hard place," getting into my clothes 
and starting on my journey at once. 

Exposure to rain and sun, fierce heat and bitter 
cold had beaten every soft line out of the driver's 
face and faded his hair to the color of tow, but his 
eyes were just the same, I imagined, as they must 
have been when he was a boy, and had a young, 
kindly face to match them. He came in and sat 
down on my cot while I hurriedly dressed. 

Then he explained what the trouble was and how 
he wanted my assistance. 

"I don't want you to go into this thing 'thout 
knowin' what you're gettin' inter; but there's a man 
here who's been ordered off the reservation. I 
knowed him when he was all right, an' now he's no 
good and got an abyration of his mind, and he's 
been ordered off in twenty-four hours as a disorderly 
and dangerous person. 

"He's spent many's the dollar on the stage com- 
pany travelin' from post to post, fixm* up post 
traders' an' Indian agents' books for 'em — he's an 
expert accountant an' made big money at it — but he 
got a-drinkin', and three weeks ago he took a horse 
and went out, all fired up, into the Bad Lands. Last 
Monday he come back afoot, wrong in his head, 
and without a cent on him. Now he's a nuisance, 
they say, and he's got ter git. He can't pay his 
fare to Bismarck on the stage (it's nine dollars), 
and if I take him and the company finds it out I'll 

81 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

have to pay his fare myself, and likely lose my job 
besides. You're the only passenger that's goin' out 
this trip and I ask you as a man/' and here he bit 
a large piece off a black plug, "if you'll help me git 
him to Bismarck and say nothin' about it to the 
company." 

This appeal, which he got out with a good deal of 
difficulty and as though he felt he was proposing 
something very much in the nature of a crime, backed 
up as it was by the deep kindliness of the honest 
eyes set in his weatherbeaten face, won my instant 
consent. He came over and shook my hand, told 
me his name was Jim Caldwell, and he was glad to 
make my acquaintance. With a warning that I had 
best shut the dog in before he drove up to the door, 
he returned to the stables for his team. 

I coaxed the great mastiff to his bed under my 
cot, stroked his fine head a moment or two, and 
then, carrying my bag outside the ramshackle house, 
carefully closed the door. 

Standing out there in darkness, relieved only by 
the deep-red glow in the northwestern sky from a 
distant prairie fire, I had the other side of the situa- 
tion thrust very uncomfortably on my attention. 
Here I was about to commence a long night journey 
through a rough, uninhabited country with a man 
who had an "aby ration of his mind" and had been 
pronounced disorderly and dangerous, for my sole 
fellow-passenger. All the old stories about the won- 
derful strength and reckless ways of exerting it, com- 
mon to men in his condition, came trooping up 

before me, and I was beginning to have a chilly feeling 

82 




TRYING TO LOWER THE WHITE HOUSE TEMPERATURE 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

creep up my back when the stage drove up to the 
door. 

The driver, without a word, put out his hand for 
my bag and helped me to a seat beside him. 

"Where is your man?" I a&ked in a low voice, for 
the rear seat was unoccupied. 

"Under the mail bags/ 9 he replied in a whisper, 
"and if he'll keep quiet till we git past the sentries 
it '11 be more luck than I look for." 

If the last sentry, as we cleared the fort, had not 
been exceedingly sleepy he must have observed that 
the United States mail was certainly alive when we 
passed him, for I had to creep back over the seats 
and sit down on the mail bags very hard to keep our 
stowaway passenger from coming to light. We were 
well out on a level stretch of road, north of the fort, 
before I felt it was safe to let the poor, smothered 
fellow out from his hiding place. Then he raised 
himself up — he was a big man of fine physique, as 
I well remember — and we sat there under the dim- 
red glow of the northwestern sky, with just the 
width of the wagon bed between us, and looked at 
each other. 

The poor fellow was angry ; there was no mistaking 
the glare in his eye and his threatening attitude. 
To be sat on for fifteen minutes by a stranger, while 
being jolted over a rough road, was a state of affairs 
calculated to stir up the wrath of a man in his right 
mind. My task was to explain the situation to a 
man whose mind had strayed away somewhere on 
those waterless plains, never, so far as I know, to be 
found again! I sat there watching him as a mouse 

83 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

might a cat, every fiber of my being strung up to a 
defensive encounter in which I saw I must be 
worsted. Suddenly I heard myself say, as though it 
were some one else speaking, in a most indifferent, 
careless tone: 

"It's a very cool evening, sir." 

"Quite so," he replied, and then he took the rear 
seat, while I climbed forward to my own. 

Jim, the driver, who had kept an eye on us, said 
nothing; but he heaved a sigh of relief and furtively 
looked me over, a good deal as a veteran would a 
raw recruit who had neglected to run away at the 
first fire. 

As for me, I sat there wondering what good angel 
had wagged my tongue for me to such good purpose, 
for it was only because I knew my own voice that 
I was sure I had spoken. We had gone but a little 
way farther when we came to an outlying Indian 
village. 

Jim hadn't thought what a commotion our driv- 
ing through it at such an unusual hour would stir up. 

We had barely passed the first tepee before we 
were surrounded by more kinds of dogs than are 
to be found in all the Eastern states. A wolfish 
strain appeared to run through all this tribe of hybrid 
dogdom, and if their bodies differed in size and 
shape and shagginess they were one in their pro- 
longed and dismal howling. Another peculiarity of 
the Indian dog is that he seldom reaches old age 
with a tail to wag, though, to be sure, he usually 
has but little to wag it over. Very fortunately, my 

fellow-passenger was just as much afraid of the 

84 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

snapping, snarling pack that surrounded the wagon 
as I was. If the notion had struck him to get out 
and fight them, he must certainly have been torn 
to pieces. As a matter of fact he burrowed under 
the mail bags in fear and trembling and did not 
venture forth again until we were far out on the 
uplands. 

Where the wind had full sweep it was very cold, 
and we got out a pair of gray blankets, wrapped the 
poor accountant up from head to foot in them, and 
settled him comfortably in his seat. Then we drove 
on; the road was rough and the wagon made a great 
racket in the dark, still night. Suddenly Jim pulled 
up his horses with a jerk and nearly fell out of his 
seat. I brought up against the dashboard, but was 
in no danger of falling out of the wagon, for some- 
thing had seized my right ankle with a grip of 
steel. As I looked down, there, gazing up at me 
from between Jim's feet and mine, was the face 
of our passenger. His left hand was clasped about 
Jim's ankle and his right around mine. He didn't 
seem disposed to let go, insisted that he was com- 
fortable lying on the bottom of the wagon with his 
legs propped up against the rear seat and his feet 
waving about in the air, and tried, with a cunning 
smile, to persuade us it was a most natural position. 

We did our best to coax and wheedle him into 
getting back on his seat, but in vain. 

Jim whispered to me that he couldn't drive 

through the Bad Lands with that face staring up 

at him. Finally, when we least expected it, a new 

notion came to our friend and he rolled himself up 

85 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

carefully in his blanket and resumed his seat. Every- 
thing went well for a time — he seemed to have 
become drowsy; the road was much cut up with 
gullies, and Jim had all he could do to watch his 
horses. I kept looking back from time to time, 
but, finding everything quiet, dozed off at last, 
myself. It was Jim's hand on my arm that awakened 
me, and my first thought was to look back. Our 
passenger had disappeared! 

It is hard to describe our predicament so that one 
who reads this in the quiet surroundings of streets 
and houses and the safeguards of a settled country 
can realize it. It was as though we had let a child 
stray away from us into the terrors of the night. 
There was nothing for it but to undertake the diffi- 
cult task of recovering our lost passenger. 

"He can't be far," said Jim, "but if he's tryin' to 
give us the slip, we kin never find him in this devil's 
country!" 

Unlashing the lantern from the dashboard, I 
started back over the road to look for him. I was to 
go back not more than half a mile, and, should I fail 
to find him, was then to return to the wagon. It 
wasn't a pleasant errand, and, as I stumbled across 
gullies, skirting weatherworn hills that rose in 
jagged outline to the west, I kept hoping and rather 
dreading to meet my troublesome fellow-traveler 
at every turn of the road. Even though I should 
find him, it was a question whether or not he would 
return to the wagon with me. 

There was nothing to do but tramp on, looking 
up and down the dry gullies and trusting to some 

86 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

fortunate chance to suggest a way of coaxing him 
back to the wagon if he came in range of my lantern. 
I had come to a bit of swamp that was corduroyed, 
which I dimly remembered jolting over as we crossed 
it in the wagon. There was something going on at 
the farther side of it— a great splashing and falling 
of logs one on another. I held the lantern before 
me and made my way across the creaking logs. 
There, up to his knees in the swamp, was our lost 
passenger, busily tearing up and prying out the tree 
trunks that formed the roadway. Evidently he had 
been annoyed by the jolting and had slipped out of 
the wagon and proceeded to tear up the offending 
roadbed. 

I swung my lantern around until it caught his 
eye, then stood still, saying nothing, but waiting 
for him to forget his present occupation and hoping 
his next notion would be to follow my lantern. 

It seemed a long time that his glittering eyes 
rested on me. It was certainly an uncomfortable 
time, for I had seen him tear up logs that, jammed 
as they were in the mud, were enough for three men 
to handle; and I knew that the first thing to enter 
his poor, empty head would be the thing he would 
do. Presently he pulled himself out of the mud, 
picked up his blanket, which he had left in the road- 
way, and, wrapping himself up from head to foot 
in it, stood up before me. 

I turned about and slowly walked back in the 
direction of the wagon, listening intently all the 
while for his footsteps. A man walking on a corduroy 

road steps about as he does on railroad ties — not 

87 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

always finding a log just where he expects it, he 
makes long and short strides. Soon I heard my 
man shuffling irregularly along over the logs after 
me. Before we had left the little swamp far behind 
he halted at the mouth of a gully, and I set my lan- 
tern down in the middle of the road and waited, 
(taring that he would strike out into the hills; but 
instead he sat down and pulled off his boots, which 
were full of water, and started forward again in his 
stocking feet. 

Here was an awkward problem added to the one 
I already had on my hands — how to get possession 
of those boots without losing their owner. Its solu- 
tion came to me at the time as a kind of grim joke. 
I picked up my lantern and let my poor friend come 
up close behind me as I trudged along for a few 
rods; then I wheeled around in as large a circle as 
the roadway permitted and we retraced our steps to 
the boots. I picked these up and was about to 
repeat the wheeling about, when my fellow-passenger 
suddenly became very angry, tore the boots from my 
hand, sat down at the side of the road, and, after a 
hard tussle, pulled them on. 

We resumed our march back to the wagon. Ar- 
rived there, I secured the lantern, climbed aboard 
in as matter-of-fact a way as possible, and a moment 
later our charge pulled himself up to his seat in the 
same manner. Then, without a word being said, we 
drove on. 

I was shivering and cold now that the strain was 
over, and well I remember how carefully Jim wrapped 
a big gray blanket around me. There was gratitude 

88 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

and an apology for mixing me up in this troublesome 
adventure in the way he did it. 

Our passenger had done nothing violent to speak 
of, so far; in fact, we had been surprised to see how 
easily we had controlled him. Yet, somehow, the 
farther we traveled that night the harder it was to 
keep our nerves steady. 

By this time we had swung well away to the west- 
ward from the river — Fort Yates stood on a high 
bluff on the west bank of the Missouri — and were 
wending our way among the grim buttes of the 
veritable Bad Lands. It does not require any great 
amount of imagination to see in these weatherworn 
crags Gargantuan castles, cities, and towers; and I 
am free to admit that, although I have traversed 
that country several times, it has never been with- 
out an unreasonable but unconquerable feeling of 
dread. On this night all the somberness of that 
broken land was accentuated by the deepening red 
glow in the northwestern sky and the strange com- 
pany in which I found myself. 

"Them buttes make 'most everybody talk queer 
when they first see 'em," said Jim. "I had a passen- 
ger wonct; he was a kin' of a letcherer goin' around, 
I think, and he said, in a sort of big way, "This, 
gentlemen, is the arketekcher of Hades.' I asked 
another passenger, an old trooper, what he meant by 
that, an' he said he meant 'it looked like hell.' I've 
got so I've named the worst-looking of them buttes 
kinder common names like the 'deepo' and the 
'opery house' and such — it makes it easier to pass 
'em of a dark night." 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

To make matters worse, it soon became evident 
that we were going to encounter at least the out- 
skirts of a great prairie fire before the night was 
over, and, while we knew what to do and had no 
fear of being caught, yet we were fearful of the effect 
of it on our unfortunate comrade. He, by the way, 
was pretty well exhausted from his exertions in 
tearing up the corduroy road, and, rolled in his 
blanket, lay fast asleep on the rear seat. 

The wind was rising and the faint odor of burning 
grasses was beginning to reach us. Jim had driven 
over that road with many a prairie fire raging about 
him before. 

" Long as I got matches no perarry fire can't catch 
me; all yer got to do if it gets too clost is to set 
fire t' the grasses to leeward and drive right over the 
black stubble. But how will he take it if we git near 
a big blaze? I'm feared of his running into it like a 
fool horse '11 do." 

As the night wore on we settled down into almost 
absolute silence. Jim and I were troubled a good 
deal by the smoke, but our charge, with his head 
wrapped up in his blanket, still slept soundly. It 
was along in this part of the night that we heard the 
long, mournful howl of a dog or wolf — I could not 
have told which. Jim only remarked, "Injun dog," 
and as I knew we were beyond the bounds of the 
reservation, I inquired what kind of Indians he sup- 
posed owned that dog. 

"Hostiles drove in by cold weather," he replied. 
"Some of Sittin' Bull's crowd comin' down from 
Canady, I reckon. I used to carry a gun for them 

90 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

fellers; but they don't go around with targets 
painted on 'em, waitin' to be hit, and I said to my- 
self one day, 'Yer safer without a gun. If they 
want to shoot you, they'll lay for you in the dark an* 
do it.' So I hain't carried a gun since." 

We presently heard the swish of tent poles being 
dragged through the grass by a pony, and then the 
grim figure of an old buck on horseback, with a rifle 
across his saddle bow, appeared coming toward us. 
Behind him came a pony loaded down with four or 
five youngsters, besides the tent poles, so that his 
back was bowed. Then came a still smaller pony — 
a yearling colt, it looked — with a tiny youngster 
strapped on its back, two or three dogs loaded down 
with camp stuff, and finally an old squaw sturdily 
tramping along, with a baby and everything else 
there was left of the family belongings packed on 
her back. They passed by with a "How!" and we 
were well pleased that our poor absent-minded friend 
snored through it all in the seclusion of his blanket. 

We had come out from the lee of an enormous 
hill known as Castle Butte, which had sheltered us 
from the wind for a mile or two, and were now on a 
more open stretch of prairie where the smoke-laden 
wind caught us with a full blast. 

"You've got to git behind one of them little buttes 
ahead pretty quick if you don't wanter git your 
tails singed," Jim muttered to his horses; and he 
gave them what might be termed more than a taste 
of the whip, for the first time that night. So far we 
had seen only the reflection of the fire in the sky; 

now we could see the flames themselves, broken 

91 



A WORLD WORTS WHILE 

here and there by the irregularity of the land and 
many miles away, but traveling toward us like a 
pack of wolves. 

"There's a big gully washed out at the fur end of 
the 'court house'" (the keen lash cracked in the 
direction of a particularly nasty-looking crag ahead), 
"and if we can only make it we can pull up in there 
an* our deadhead passenger 11 never know there was 
a perarry fire." 

We made a gallant race against the onrushing 
flames for the "court house," and if one of our 
horses hadn't picked up a stone we should have won 
it; but the wind was blowing a gale, with now a 
lull for a moment and then a fiercer blast than before. 
The smoke was suffocating, and at last it set our poor 
accountant to gasping in his blanket. A long line 
of flame seemed to shoot forward ahead of us like a 
train of gunpowder. 

"We can't make it," whispered Jim in my ear. 
"I hope he won't get excited. Try an* keep him 
tangled up in his blanket while I set fire to the 
grass." In a moment Jim had an old newspaper on 
fire and had started a blaze in half a dozen places. 
The grass burned slowly at first, but when the flames 
had once united, away the fire sped like some wild 
creature trying to escape the mighty sea of flame 
that was following it, now barely half a mile away. 

Then our passenger sat up and tore off bis blanket 
and looked wildly about at the blazing prairie, 
while I, having all I could do to hold the plunging 
and terrified horses, was powerless to prevent him 
from doing whatever he chose. 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

With a cry of, "Save the mail first!" he began 
tossing the mail bags out of the wagon. 

Then I saw Jim coming. With one bound he was 
in the wagon and, with his powerful arms gripping 
the poor, daft creature about the legs, had tripped 
him up; a second more and the two men were in the 
bottom of the wagon, struggling for their lives, and 
from the confused black mass came Jim's voice; 
"Git onter the stubble!" 

The frantic team needed no urging and, with the 
half-burnt grass showering sparks from our wheels, 
we tore after the retreating backfire. 

Before we had gone a hundred yards Jim had 
shaken himself free from the terrible grip of his 
passenger and called to me to drive on, that he was 
going back after the two mail bags which had been 
thrown out. He slipped over the tailboard and 
started back toward the trail. I drove on fifty 
yards farther and then pulled up the horses and 
looked back. It was like looking into the mouth of 
a furnace; there was nothing but fire — except the 
tiny black figure outlined against it. That was Jim. 
I saw him stoop and pick up a mail bag and grope 
about for the other; then came a fearful blast of 
fire-laden air and I could see nothing but flame. 

My fellow-passenger lay stretched out on the 
mail bags in the bottom of the wagon; his seat had 
been overturned and knocked out of the wagon 
during the struggle. Whether he was alive or dead 
I did not know, but that he could do no harm at 
present was a certainty. I jumped to the ground, 
slipped loose the traces, and secured the horses as 






A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

best I could to the tongue of the wagon; while I 
was doing this the flaming sky seemed suddenly 
rent apart, one-half going by to the right, the other 
to the left. In a moment it had passed, leaving the 
stars shining through a veil of smoke. I started 
back over the smoldering stubble to find Jim, and 
soon saw a blackened figure coming slowly toward 
me, dragging along the two mail bags, his hair 
singed and his hands badly blistered. 

"I thought I was gone over the range that time, 
sure," he said. "I just laid flat and pulled the mail 
bags clost over my head when the fire flashed over 
me. They took fire, of course, but I trampled it out 
when the big flame got by. 

How's he?' 9 continued Jim, gripping my arm. 
I hope I didn't choke him too hard, but I had to 
pertect the mail." 

We made our way back to the wagon with a good 
deal of dread, and Jim said: "You take the lantern 
an' look at him. Dern me if I can." I took the 
light and, standing on the wheel, managed to turn 
him over; he gave no sign of life. I opened my 
traveling bag and got out a flask of whisky, and with 
a good deal of difficulty got his mouth open wide 
enough to pour in a few drops. He gave a gasp and 
swallowed. That was enough for Jim. He went off 
a little way and coughed a few times; then he came 
back, put the wagon to rights, hitched up his team, 
and, when his passengers were once more settled 
in their seats, pulled back into the trail. 

We changed horses at the Cannon Ball River an 
hour or so later, and, after dodging prairie fires 

9* 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

several times during the ensuing day by driving in 
behind buttes while the fire divided and went by on 
either side, we at last drew up on the bluffs below 
Fort Lincoln. 

Here we prepared for the ferry across the Mis- 
souri by stowing away our charge under the mail 
bags and blankets once more, as Jim had managed 
to impress on his poor, clouded brain the necessity 
for concealment from his enemies. With the ferry 
safely crossed, our anxieties were about over, and 
when the houses of Bismarck were plainly in sight 
we halted. This was as far as Jim dared carry his 
deadhead passenger. 

We had secured enough food to last him for a day 
at the Cannon Ball relay station. This he carried 
tied up in his handkerchief. I wrote a brief state- 
ment of his case on a leaf torn from my memo- 
randum book and put it in his pocket; and as he had 
acquaintances in the town, we felt that he was com- 
paratively safe. We had done what we could for 
him and there was now just time to catch the night 
express for the East — yet I should have liked to 
tarry a little. He looked lonesome, poor devil, 
tramping behind us along the trail in the dusty 
twilight. 



CHAPTER VII 

IN due course the Northern Pacific Railway 
landed me safely at Fargo, North Dakota. 
Owing to its location near the head of naviga- 
tion on the Red River of the North, this frontier 
town was then the "jumping-off point" for the 
Canadian Northwest, just as Bismarck was for our 
own Northwestern Territory. Winnipeg, then still 
known by the Hudson's Bay Company name of 
Fort Garry, lay about seventy-five miles beyond the 
border, on the Red River, and was the chief center 
of trade, population, and government for all the 
western half of the Dominion of Canada. It was 
this picturesque outpost of the white man's world 
that I had set my heart upon viewing before the in- 
rush of settlers should destroy forever its old-time 
flavor. 

I spent some days in Fargo, waiting for a steam- 
boat to take me to Fort Garry, and I made the ac- 
quaintance there of the freight agent, who was at 
that time the leading citizen of the town. There 
was no jail, or need of one, in Fargo. There was no 
mayor, no policeman, no sheriff, no judge — only the 
freight agent. 

I asked him how he accounted for the good be- 
havior of the entire community. He said it was 

96 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

because everyone in Fargo had such a respect for 
the law. 

"Why, only last week, if you had been here, you 
might have seen an example of how we administer 
justice/' he explained. "We believe in fairness and 
in helpfulness to our neighbor. 

"To go back a little, a young fellow came to town 
six months ago and said he wanted to start a shoe 
store, but he hadn't enough money to finance it 
alone. We — that is, myself and a few of the most 
influential citizens — talked the matter over and de- 
cided to help the young man. The town needed 
a shoe store; so we raised a few hundred dollars to 
add to what he already had, and told him to go down 
to Chicago and stock up. 

"Well, he came back from Chicago with just two 
boxes of shoes — ladies' shoes — and there were only 
two ladies in town- We asked him where the rest 
of his stock was, and he said it was coming. But it 
didn't come, and finally he confessed. He had never 
had so much money in his hands before, and he got 
excited and lost most of his money down there in 
the city playing the black and the red. 

"Well, we — that is, myself and a few of the most 
influential citizens, had a meeting down to the 
freight office, and we decided to give the boy another 
chance. We believe in fairness and being helpful to 
a new citizen, so we raised some more money and 
sent the young fellow back to Chicago for shoes 
(men's shoes, which were needed bad) to stock up 
with. That time he came back with the goods. We 
were glad to see a young fellow appreciate fairness and 

97 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

helpfulness and we said among ourselves we'd forget 
he owed us for the shoes he didn't get the first trip. 

"The boxes he had brought from Chicago were 
standing in the freight house, ready to be hauled 
over to his store. That evening the train for Bis- 
marck was just pulling out from the station, and as I 
looked out of my office window there I saw the young 
fellow with his grip, swinging himself aboard. 

"I jumped out of the door and pulled the lever 
that dropped a semaphore down the track a ways 
and the train pulled up with a jerk. I took that 
young fellow off the train and marched him back 
to his pile of shoe boxes. He whined and cried while 
I pried the top off of one of 'em; and there was 
every kind of old trash packed in that box, but not a 
single shoe. 

"I called a meeting of a few of the influential 
citizens together at once, and just as the sun was 
settin' we all took a walk together, the young fellow 
and the men that had twice trusted him, a stranger 
to 'em. We went over to the big elm by the river, 
and then we all came back — all except the young 
fellow. People in this town are law-abiding. We 
couldn't see how that young man fitted in." 

Fargo proved too law-abiding to be long inter- 
esting. The water in the Red River, which, by the 
way, flows due north, was too low for the little stern- 
wheel steamer to come as far up as Fargo, so eventu- 
ally I took a branch railroad up to Grand Forks and 
there embarked in a rickety old craft which the cap- 
tain hoped would hold together long enough to 

make the trip to Winnipeg and back. 

98 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

With the exception of Mark Twain, this captain 
was about the last survival of the old Mississippi 
pilots whom it was ever my good fortune to meet. 
He used to be a pilot between New Orleans and St. 
Louis when a Mississippi steamboat was one of the 
great institutions of the United States; when the 
gambling in the cabins ran high, when thousands of 
dollars were wagered on races between rival lines 
and the black deckhands were supposed to take 
turns sitting on the safety valves; when the best 
of food and the best of cooks made traveling a joy; 
and when the traveler had always before him the 
interesting possibility of ending his voyage and his 
life in a grand display of pyrotechnics as the tinder- 
box on which he was a passenger disappeared like a 
meteor in the night. 

Our captain maintained his traditions even in 
this dilapidated old stern-wheel steamer. He sat 
at the head of the table at dinner, and he had brought 
from the south an old woolly-headed cook who sur- 
prised the three or four cabin passengers on a five 
days' journey with wonderful desserts concocted 
in fantastic shapes. 

Then, too, the captain had with him a villainous- 
looking first mate — just such a mate as one reads 
about in the stories of old Mississippi days. He was 
a little, wiry old fellow with a yellow face and hair 
dyed jet black and plastered down over his right 
eye. I couldn't tell whether he was French, Spanish, 
Indian, or a mixture of all three, but he was cer- 
tainly a dose relative of the Old Harry, and he 
could (and did) bedevil the deckhands in a wide 
99 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

assortment of languages, to which, in this Northern 
land, he had added the Scandinavian tongue. 

There was, however, one man whom he let very 
much alone after the first day. This was a young 
giant who wore a woodsman's mackinaw — a hand- 
some fellow with hair that curled over a fine fore- 
head and with just a suspicion of a beard. 

The little mate started in, before we left the 
landing, to pitch into this big fellow, evidently on the 
theory that if he cowed him control of all the others 
would be easy. Two or three times the little squeak- 
ing voice of the mate cracked about the big, good- 
humored boy's ears like a whip lash. He just looked 
surprised and went on with his work, carrying enor- 
mous piles of wood on his shoulder for the boilers. 
Then all at once, when the mate grew even more 
abusive than usual, the young fellow walked up 
alongside of him, towering up over him with his 
load of cordwood poised on one shoulder, and simply 
looked down at him without a word. 

The mate returned his stare in dead silence. It 
was a picture, to the life, of a fox terrier looking up 
at a Newfoundland. Well the little mate knew that 
just one word from him would bring down a load of 
firewood upon his head. He addressed his further 
remarks to men a trifle nearer his own size. 

I soon discovered, on closer acquaintance, that 
the mate's language was purely professional and his 
relation to the Old Harry only, after all, like the 
rest of us — he had a bit of the devil in him. He saw 
that the deckhands had plenty of good food to eat 
and, of course, he had to get a day's work out of 

100 




HE DIDNT LIKE THE ROAD-BED 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

each of them or lose his job. Outside of dyeing 
hair, he was a pretty decent citizen. 

One night about midnight the captain sent some 
one to my stateroom to wake me up. A big prairie 
fire was raging to the west and north of us and was 
sweeping down toward the river. The Red River 
winds and twists at a level from thirty to forty feet 
below the surrounding plain, and its banks are lined 
for miles with cottonwoods and underbrush, much 
of the latter dead and as dry as tinder. 

Now these dead trees flamed up like torches above 
the general conflagration and up on the deck it was 
almost as light as day. Just ahead of us the flames 
had reached the river and there we saw a sight 
which held us enthralled. Elk and antelope, timber 
wolves, coyotes, jack rabbits, foxes, and one pure- 
white creature which dashed into the shadows before 
I could make it out — each one oblivious to this 
strange companionship with his deadliest enemies- 
all swept madly down headlong into the river. 

Late in the evening of the fifth day aboard the 
little steamer we discovered lights ahead. 

"That's Winnipeg," the captain informed me, 
and in half an hour we were at the dock. About the 
only thing we could see was a scow, anchored just 
below us, on which rested a little wood-burning 
locomotive with an enormous smokestack. On the 
locomotive were the initials C. P. R. It was all 
that existed at that time, west of Ottawa, of the 
Canadian Pacific Railway. 

That night, I slept in a small hotel near the river 

bank and the next morning I was awakened by a 

101 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

strange noise. It sounded like the scream of some 
great bird, but it was too long continued to be that. 
Still only half awake, I got out of bed and went to 
the window. 

It must be a very dreadful thing to be the victim 
of an attack of aphasia, to lose for a time your own 
identity. As I looked out of that window the sense 
of location had left me absolutely. All memory of 
the voyage up the river was gone, and a feeling crept 
over me not very far removed from fright. From 
the nineteenth century I had dropped, as from the 
clouds, into the seventeenth or eighteenth. 

To the southward I saw the four turrets and the 
frowning walls of an ancient fort. Across the river 
lay a row of low thatch-roofed buildings and an old 
stucco monastery. Down in the street voyageurs 
walked about with bright-colored woolen scarfs 
wound about their waists. Several Indians passed 
by. In vain I sought a clew to my whereabouts. 

Then my eye suddenly caught a glimpse of that 
little wood-burning locomotive and my own familiar 
world came back with a rush. But the little loco- 
motive could do no more than strike a small dis- 
cordant note in this picture of bygone days — the 
days of the old exploiting companies with their 
strange charters entitling them to things which 
belonged to nobody, or, at any rate, to nobody 
strong enough to defend his rights. 

Fort Garry was still one of the great depots of 
the "Honorable the Hudson's Bay Company." 
The business of that great institution was going on 
pretty nearly in the same way that it had been 

102 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

conducted since the day when it took charge of the 
lives and liberties of every creature of the North 
which was unfortunate enough to bear fur on its 
back. Winnipeg, which is now a large and flourishing 
modern city with electricity and strikes and bandits, 
was then a small town or village centering about 
old Fort Garry. As I stood at the little window, 
trying to get myself adjusted to this strange old 
world, I heard again the wild screeching cry that had 
awakened me, but it was some time later in the day 
before I discovered what produced it. 

After breakfast I started to walk about the town, 
and I was soon in a state of mind much like that of 
Alice in Wonderland. In front of a store where one 
would naturally have expected to see a few barrels 
of potatoes and heads of cabbage stood a row of 
moose heads with their spreading antlers. Down 
on the river I saw a battered flat-bottomed and 
square-ended boat (we used to call that kind of a 
craft a "John boat" in the West), and in it were a 
stove, two or three reed-bottomed chairs, and a 
respectable old red-and-white cow that looked as 
though she ought to be ashore eating grass. 

A fat old priest was sitting in the stern of a canoe, 
paddling across the river. The bow of his ridiculous 
little cockleshell was clear out of water, and the 
combination so strongly reminded me of Father 
William that I could hardly keep from asking of 
him, "Do you think, at your age, it is right?" 

As I continued down the river bank I heard again 
that mysterious screech which had awakened me at 
daylight, only repeated now and multiplied a hun- 

108 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

dredfold. The sounds seemed to come from a wood 
that stretched along the west bank of the river. 
These must be pretty large birds, I thought, to make 
such a loud squawking; but I was prepared to see 
almost anything except what emerged presently 
from the wood — just a long line of two-wheeled bul- 
lock carts, the wooden wheels of which, turning on 
wooden axles without aid of grease, had squawked 
and screeched and screamed for hundreds of miles 
as they brought in packs of skins. This was the 
final stage of a journey begun on the backs of Indian 
trappers two thousand miles north and continued 
on dog sleds, canoes, and bateaux till the final land 
stage was reached. 

Curiously enough, in all this runaway trip I felt 
that I was just having a glorious holiday, as carefree 
as the grasshopper in the fable. My sketchbook, 
with which I started out, was filled long ago and 
"tea paper," "butcher's paper" — anything I could 
get at trading posts or "Company" stores — was 
pressed into service. There was another point of 
resemblance between myself and the fabled grass- 
hopper. Winter was fast approaching up in that 
northern land and by the time I had made a canoe 
voyage far beyond Fort Garry my clothes had be- 
come so worn and were so thin that I began to think 
it would be advisable once more to metamorphose 
myself into a Franklin Square ant and go to work. 

For weeks I had camped with the hardy voy ageurs, 
the most cheerful fellows I ever met, ever singing as 
they swung to their paddles and telling stories 
around their fires at night. 

104 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

We lived well, up there in the woods. Our cook 
had the Frenchman's genius for his trade. He 
would dig a deep hole in the ground and build a 
fire over it, allowing the coals to drop down until his 
impromptu oven was very hot; then he would rake 
out the coals, put a great earthen pot of beans in the 
hole, and pile dirt and coals on top. In the same way 
he baked bread. Game, which was plentiful in those 
days, added a zest to our table. 

Always with a Frenchman one feels the touch of 
art — a little flair in the way he wears his cap or ties 
his woolen scarf about his waist, the manipulation 
of his paddle, and the swing and rhythm of his 
boating song. Through all the rough life, the hard- 
ships of twenty generations, this heritage from the 
men who left France to conquer the forest and 
found a new kingdom has survived. 

Our little expedition in the canoes was undertaken 
for the purpose of meeting a small steamboat which 
was bringing pelts across a wide lake and of trans- 
ferring its cargo. On our way back to Winnipeg 
we encountered many frosty mornings and I found 
it necessary to prepare at once for my homeward 
journey. I was sorry to leave old Fort Garry where 
I had so suddenly plunged from the nineteenth back 
into the eighteenth century and beyond. It was 
hard to leave the romance of the voyageur and come 
back to the clatter of the Elevated train. But when 
the Pembina stage drove up to the little Winnipeg 
Inn on a cold damp morning before the sun was up, 
I felt it was time for the grasshopper to get down to 
a more genial climate. 

105 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

My fellow-passengers were the wife of an officer 
in the Mounted Police, her six-weeks-old baby, and 
her sister. The stage was well supplied with buffalo 
robes and we managed to keep comfortably warm. 
A few miles out from Winnipeg a howling blizzard 
struck us and our driver had great difficulty in keep- 
ing the road. 

About nine o'clock we came to the first station 
for a change of horses, where one might also, sup- 
posedly, get breakfast. We entered the station, 
which was a one-room log cabin, and there found our 
hostess, a half-breed squaw, standing just inside 
the door, extending a greasy hand for our half- 
dollars, advance payment for the meal. She pocketed 
the money and then set out three disreputable- 
looking plates on a bare table, and beside each a 
tin spoon. On her stove stood an iron pot in which 
some kind of an inky mass bubbled. With a cracked 
wooden ladle the old squaw filled our plates with 
this dismal mixture and bade us be seated. 

We were all hungry and we pulled up our chairs 
to the table. We called for bread and butter. There 
was no bread and butter. There was no coffee. 
"Only meat, good meat — eat 'em." But although 
the ladies had doubtless roughed it many a time and 
so had I, we balked at the contents of our hostess's 
iron pot. It looked too much like a devil's brew 
from the River Styx. 

Out into the blizzard we went, minus fifty cents 
and a breakfast apiece, and with fresh horses strug- 
gled on, only to lose the road entirely. All day we 
traveled southward as nearly as our driver could 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

keep his direction. Then after darkness had closed 
in and it looked as though we would have to drive 
into a clump of willows and tie up for the night, I 
discovered a glimmer of light to our left. The vil- 
lage of Pembina it certainly must be, and we made 
for it joyfully. Suddenly, as we approached closer, 
we found ourselves on the bank of the Red River, 
and saw that the lights were the lamps in the cabin 
of a steamboat which was tied up to the bank. 
Through the windows on the upper deck we could 
see the captain at the head of the dinner table and 
things to eat everywhere. 

With no waste of time the boat was hailed and a 
gangplank was thrown out by my friend, the old 
Mississippi mate. I knew him instantly by his 
unique brand of profanity. Our grand old captain 
welcomed us to his table. He knew the two ladies 
and remembered me and my sketchbook. We made 
the remainder of the trip on the steamboat. She 
lay all that night where we boarded her. Next 
morning the sun came out, the snow melted away, 
and in two days, when we reached Grand Forks, it 
was bright and warm. 

On the way down I saw, just at sunset, what looked 
like a small bathhouse perched up on the bank. 
Several men with guns and dogs were gathered about 
it, and one of the men was signaling us to stop. We 
pulled up alongside and threw out the gangplank. 
Then the old mate and his crew swarmed ashore 
and began dragging the "bathhouse" on to the 
gangplank, some of the men wading in the icy 
water alongside to keep the unwieldy freight from 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

toppling over into the river. They had almost 
reached the boat when somebody slipped on the 
muddy bottom and over went the huge crate into 
the river. A steam winch and all the mate's vocabu- 
lary were required to land it safely on the forward 
deck. 

The owner of this remarkable piece of personal 
baggage was a short* good-looking young English 
sportsman with a blond beard, a pipe, a tweed suit, 
and an imperturbable manner. When his crate 
went overboard he merely remarked, "I say, upon 
my word!" and went on smoking. The crate which 
stood on the deck, oozing Red River mud and water 
at every crevice, contained the trophies of his entire 
summer's- campaign: buffalo heads, elks 9 antlers, 
antelope skins, the hides of timber wolves, and even 
rattlesnake skins. 

Personally, I shall never be able to get the point 
of view of the mighty hunter. When you meet him, 
he is a simple, charming, kindly person, and yet his 
sole pleasure in life seems to be to kill some peace- 
ful creature that is enjoying itself in a way that 
interferes with nobody in the world. This young 
Englishman was true to type, and I found him a 
delightful fellow-passenger. He was very happy 
because he had killed so many fine animals and 
because he was to join his uncle in Equatorial 
Africa the next season, there to kill still more and 
bigger game. He brought out from their leather 
cases for my edification two heavy elephant guns 
which he had brought along for practice. He had 
taken one of them on a buffalo hunt, with the result 

108 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

that the buffalo was badly frightened but unhurt, 
while the hunter suffered a dislocated shoulder. 

When the steamboat reached Grand Forks, then 
the end of a little branch line of the Northern 
Pacific Railway, we had just two hours until the train 
left. Captain Powell, my English friend, was in a 
quandary about his box of trophies. He had but 
just time, if he made all connections, to catch his 
steamer for Liverpool, but he could not bear to 
abandon his buffalo heads. 

I had noticed on the river bank a wooden box 
nailed to a big elm tree on which was painted in large 
letters, "U. S. Express Co." (or maybe it was 
"Fargo Express." I have forgotten). There was a 
small tent alongside the tree. In the box, protected 
from the weather, was a telegraph instrument. I 
took Captain Powell over to this primitive express 
office and we explained the captain's predicament 
to the agent. 

"Easiest thing in the world. I'll telegraph to 
Chicago for a through rate from here to Liverpool. 
Cost you something, of course. I saw the box at 
the landing. Answer '11 be here in plenty of time for 
you to catch your train. Meantime I'll have a 
blacksmith put bands of strap iron 'round the 
box. . . . Come back in about an hour 'n' I'll give you 
the rate." 

The agent was as good as his word. Before the 
train left we had the through rate, the price to Liver- 
pool being ninety dollars from Grand Forks; (iron 
bands two dollars and fifty cents extra), and a ship- 
ping receipt signed. The captain, standing bare- 

109 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

headed before the agent, declared that he took his 
hat off to him and the company and the whole 
United States, for not in the best-equipped office in 
England could he have had the quick, accurate 
service he obtained at a store box nailed to a tree 
in a year-old town in North Dakota. 

Some day, perhaps, I may write a new fable 
entitled "The Industrious Grasshopper" and tell 
how he "put it all over" the Ant who never hopped 
about in the Gay Sunlight and never saw the World; 
but it would not be quite fair, because, after all, 
this particular Grasshopper wasn't really a Grass- 
hopper at all, but just a wild young Ant escaped 
for a summer season from the grind and toil of his 
ant hill in Franklin Square. I had played hooky 
often enough as a boy to know what sort of recep- 
tion awaited me on my return there, and when I 
saw Mr. Parsons's face, with sorrow and displeasure 
written all over it, I was not surprised. He informed 
me that "the house" was extremely dissatisfied 
with my behavior and personally he was very 
grievously disappointed. As he turned away he 
said, "I am going downstairs to make as strong a 
plea for you as I can, but I do not hold out any hope 
that your services will be retained." 

The moment he left his little office I lugged into 
it the most disreputable, travel-stained bag ever seen 
in the neighborhood; and while that kindly gentle- 
man was pleading my cause below I plastered his 
sanctum from ceiling to floor, covering desk, table, 

chairs, and all with sketches of everything I had 

110 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

seen on my runaway trip. I was just opening 
another mud-stained packet when Mr. Parsons, who 
was very nearsighted, returned. There was a 
sorrowful expression on his sympathetic face, which 
suddenly changed to a dazed one. Then, as he saw 
the mass of material I had brought back, his whole 
countenance cleared and the enthusiastic, appre- 
ciative spirit of the man shone in his face. We 
planned pages and double pages and more pages for 
the Weekly. Finally, Mr. Parsons brought out from 
Mr. Alden's safe the manuscripts of several articles 
on "The Honourable Hudson's Bay Company," 
which had been laid aside years before, for lack of 
suitable material for illustration. I had the pic- 
tures for these, too. Thus my runaway assignment, 
to which I had assigned myself, ended happily for 
all concerned; and, to show how they appreciated 
a good joke on themselves, Messrs. Harper & 
Brothers sent me with almost a free hand, the next 
year, to Colorado. 



CHAPTER Vm 

IN the early 'eighties I had the highly ornamental 
but not very lucrative position of cartoonist for 
Life. Every week the printer loomed up in front 
of Messrs. Mitchell and Miller like a profiteering 
landlord and took away most of their available cash. 
But that first year of the little paper's existence had 
hardly ended before the money began to roll in and 
my checks grew larger. 

I had read old Ben Butler's advice to all young 
men: "Go into debt, young man!" and had fol- 
lowed his admonition very literally. But now my 
financial affairs were mending and I grew ambitious 
to become a landowner. I bought a pretty bit of 
hillside with a tiny house on it, for a thousand dol- 
lars, from Mr. Roswell Smith, president of the Cen- 
tury Company, and went into debt, as Ben Butler 
advised, for half the amount, giving my mortgage 
note for five hundred dollars. Mr. Roswell Smith 
was the father-in-law of my friend George Inness, Jr., 
who now became, thanks to this transaction, my 
near neighbor in Montclair, New Jersey. 

On the day my mortgage note fell due I went to 
the bank, drew out five one-hundred-dollar bills 
and a few small bills over for interest, and called 
on Mr. Smith at the Century offices. I handed him 

112 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the money and he had a release of the mortgage 
made out, leaving me full owner of the property 
without encumbrance. Then, like the kindly and 
fatherly gentleman he was, he said a few very 
pleasant words about how good i% was to see a young 
man careful of his obligations, etc., all of which sent 
me home feeling quite important and "worth 
while." The next morning I made up my mind to 
knock off work and take my ease for the day, per- 
haps to go out in the fields and try a water-color; 
when, oh, joy ! there at my door stood young George 
Inness. He had some kind of a roll of blue paper 
under his arm. 

"Come on!" he said. "You don't want to work 
all the time. Let's take a walk over the hills. First 
we'll go down the Old Road. We'll stop at Mrs. 
Rohlpillar's little garden and have a glass of her 
good beer and then we'll go wherever we like!" 

Off we went in the careless freedom of youth bent 
on a holiday. 

Mrs. Rohlpillar had a little place not quite im- 
portant enough to call a beer garden; but there 
were three or four tables out under a wistaria vine 
and we sat down there and sipped our beer. In 
those days we had no idea that in years to come 
our little diversion would be rated a crime and an 
honest hostess a criminal. 

Our consciences were clear. I was a thrifty man 
who had just paid an honest debt and tasted the 
joy of rectitude. George was happy because he had 
that roll of blue paper under his arm. 

"You know how I have wished for a glass studio 

IIS 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

to pose cattle in in the winter time. Well, old man, 
I'm going to have one at last. Yesterday I went to 
New York and had dinner with my father-in-law. 
He's a fine man." 

"Yes, indeed he is," I said. 

"George," he said to me, after dinner — "George, 
you've always wanted to build a glass addition to 
your studio. I remember you made the plans for it 
last year, but you thought it added a little too 
much to the cost of the studio at that time. You 
thought it would cost something like four or five 
hundred dollars. Well, to-day I received five hundred 
dollars which I did not at all expect to get, and I am 
going to hand it over to you for your glass studio!" 

"And Mr. Smith," said George, "handed me 
these five bills" — and George spread out on the 
table my five hundred-dollar bills. 

As I look back through the softening mists of 
time this seems a huge practical joke that the fates 
played on us that morning, and I can see the intensely 
ludicrous side of it; but at the time it rather flat- 
tened Mrs. Rohlpillar's beer. I tried my best to 
show deep interest in the blue prints of the new 
studio, but by and by I remembered some unfinished 
work* at home that must be attended to. 

Several years later it happened that Mr. Smith 
changed his plans in regard to the development of 
his real-estate holdings in Montclair, and my lots 
were wanted to complete his programme. He 
offered me a very generous advance on my original 
investment and I got back my thousand and a con- 
siderable sum besides. 

114 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

A year later George Inness, Sr., came to Mont- 
clair to live, and so he may be included among the 
worth-while people I have known, although I moved 
away too soon to know him well. I remember, 
while the paint was still wet, seeing several of his 
woodland pictures which are now among the most 
treasured of his productions. Judging by the care- 
less way he left these canvases about, I am sure 
that he had no idea of their value. 

About the oldest art in the world is the art of 
make-believe. The child begins it as soon as he can 
talk and he never gets over its fascination. Every- 
body wishes to know what goes on behind the scenes 
at the theater, the grown-up land of make-believe; 
and, as I happen to know a good deal about the 
inside doings of a very celebrated playhouse, it 
would be selfish to keep it to myself. 

In the 'seventies, when the old Union Square 
Theater was in its prime, a young man with ambi- 
tions to become a playwright came to town and, 
adding his impecuniosities to mine, took a couple 
of rooms in a house on East Twelfth Street. Here 
we lived for two or three years. He made an un- 
certain living as a shorthand reporter and amanu- 
ensis until the latter work brought him into contact 
with Mr. A. M. Palmer, of the theatrical firm of 
Shook & Palmer. Palmer took a fancy to him, and 
my chum, Frank Harrison, became his private 
secretary. At that time John Parselle was stage 
manager at the Union Square and played the heavy 
old-man parts. He was particularly effective in 

115 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

some of the melodramas of that day, having a won- 
derful deep voice that would make the goose flesh 
creep up and down one's spine when he stole to the 
door of the forsaken house, with the lightning 
playing through the broken window. 

During this same period Stoddard was playing 
his eccentric old men, "Money-Penny" and all the 
rest, in his quaint and whimsical way, which was 
partly not acting at all, but just his nature. He lived 
out in Rahway then, and worked in his garden until 
train time, when he dropped his hoe and came to 
town. His first stopping place was a little eating 
house on Broadway, near Twelfth Street, where 
Frank and I, fortunately, had established a limited 
credit. Parselle also took his dinners there, and 
one or two other actors of the Union Square 
company. 

When Frank had made his connection with the 
company, even in so humble a capacity as private 
secretary to the manager, he was inside the charmed 
circle; and we felt extremely important as young- 
sters who were privileged to exchange greetings 
with Mr. Stoddard and Mr. Parselle. I really believe 
if Charles R. Thome, Jr., or Charles Coghlan had 
bade us a good morning in those days we should 
have exploded. As has been mentioned before, 
the south side of Union Square from Fourth Avenue 
to Broadway was then called "The Rialto." Every 
would-be actor, as well as a great many real ones of 
the second and third rank, paraded up and down 
that short block each fair day in the week. With 

our new sources of information we learned how 

116 






A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

many tragedies were concealed under these masks of 
Hello, Steve! Glorious weather, old boy!" or, 
Just waiting for my new play!" etc. 

It had been glorious weather out there on "The 
Rialto" for Steve's friend, but a cold draught had 
blown outward upon him at the stage door these 
years back; and the man who was waiting for his 
new play may be waiting still in a more shadowy 
Rialto. In spite of the fact that play after play 
succeeded under the able management of Mr. 
Palmer, there were troubles inside the theater none 
the less. 

I remember, in one play, Miss Sara Jewett threw 
herself into the emotion of her part with such an 
intensity that at the end of the third act it was 
almost impossible for her to go on with the fourth. 
On several occasions she dropped in a dead faint 
on her way to her dressing room. She was very 
young then, hardly more than a girl, and greatly 
beloved by the whole company. To the public she 
gave more than they could ever repay, and to that 
generous use of her great emotional powers was due 
an early nervous breakdown. One of the reasons 
why plays were so successful at the Union Square 
was because big, sterling John Parselle was stage 
manager. And, curiously enough, one of his chief 
sources of worry came from as good an actor as he 
had in his company. 

In "A Celebrated Case" Stoddard took the part 
of an old Irish sergeant (Denis O'Rourke). After 
the first ten minutes on the stage he would forget 
his brogue, which had been evident enough at the 

117 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

start. Then in some other part he would forget 
where he was to stand, and this would keep the 
others guessing; but through it all Parselle would 
good-naturedly weave his way; and Stoddard had 
such a wonderful personality that with all his little 
faults he often represented a large portion of the 
success of any play he took part in. No one who 
ever saw him as Newman Noggs could forget that 
make-up. I never knew an actor who impressed 
one so much with what he seemed rather than with 
what he did. 

One of my friend Frank's duties was to round up 
actors who were careless about hours. A certain 
member of the cast in "The Banker's Daughter," 
who played the part of a very "fresh" American 
commercial traveler visiting Paris, was in the habit 
of "sitting in" at a game of poker in the afternoon, 
and if the cards were running well he would fre- 
quently forget that he was due at the little narrow 
lane on Fourth Avenue, just below Fourteenth 
Street, at 7.80 p.m. At about seven o'clock Mr. 
Palmer would begin to get nervous, and then it 
would be, "Frank, have you seen Mr. Blank? . . . 
No? That rascal will be the death of me." And 
Frank would have to put on his hat and make his 
way to sundry back rooms — he soon came to know 
the channel (marked by various "lighthouses") — 
and before the last deadline of time had passed he 
would return, like a faithful shepherd dog, bringing 
in the delinquent. 

One night the search took longer than usual, and 

Mr. Blank kept the stage waiting for fully five 

118 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

minutes. Mr. Palmer was furious, but he was a 
man who always treated his people with the utmost 
courtesy. "Mr. Blank/' he said, as the culprit 
stood before him — with a piece of grease paint in 
one hand and a wad of cotton in the other — "this 
is outrageous and cannot continue; you must im- 
mediately mend your ways. If you have no respect 
for the company, think of what you owe to the 
public! Man, why can't you act like a gentleman, 
like Mr. Coghlan, for instance?" 

"Well, Mr. Palmer, I know I've got a good deal 
of the rounder in me, but if I was a thorough gentle- 
man and acted like Mr. Charles Coghlan, I couldn't 
play this rotten part!" and Blank disappeared. Mr. 
Palmer fumed a little and then turned to his secre- 
tary with the remark, "I don't know what we 
would do without Blank!" 

But more serious troubles came up at times. 
Old theater-goers will remember what a sensation 
the production of "The Danicheffs" made when it 
was put on at the Union Square. Charles B. Thome 
Jr. made the hit of his life as Osip the serf, and 
James O'Neill was a fine and fiery figure as the 
Russian Count Vladimir Danicheff. But the days 
when this piece was in preparation were charged with 
explosives in Mr. Palmer's domain just off "The 
Rialto." 

Thome thought he was entitled to the part of the 
Count, which everyone looked on as the leading 
part. 

There were fine clothes to be worn and fine speeches 
to be made. In fact, it had every characteristic of a 

119 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

conventionally popular role. But to Thome was 
given the humiliating part of the serf, and the more 
he thought about it the angrier he got. 

Charles R. Thome Jr. was a large man, powerfully 
built, with strong and not very attractive features 
and a broad manner of acting. I can remember 
him in many parts; always when he came on the 
stage he took, by some sure instinct, exactly the 
right position to make the stage picture a perfect 
composition. It is a great gift and it always made 
him an important figure in any scene. He had no 
particular grace of action, but the fact that he was 
invariably "in the picture" was a grace in itself. 

"The Danicheffs" rehearsals went on, and Thome 
grew moodier every day, until, on the opening night, 
he was in a state of smoldering rage. If I remember 
rightly, O'Neill came on first and had a scene where 
he could exhibit all his clever elocution and show 
his splendid costume. This scene ended with only 
a glimpse of Osip the serf. Then followed a scene 
in which slowly, gloomily, Thorne, as Osip, advanced 
a third of the way across the stage. He was angry 
clean through. He felt and looked the part of a 
strong man humiliated by the position as a serf. 
He simply stood still for a moment and from that 
moment he had the audience with him. 

So far he hadn't uttered a sound, but he had made 
the hit of his life. He did not realize it then, how- 
ever, nor for some little time afterward. Harrison 
told me that Thorne left the theater after the play 
was over, still under the impression that the Prince 
had carried off the honors. 

120 




JIM SAVES THE MAIL 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

He must have been astonished when he saw the 
papers the next morning, for my recollection is that 
James O'Neill, fine actor though he was, got scant 
notice; but Osip the serf was the talk of the town. 

Now I must relate how my chum became a play- 
wright and produced a play. In one of Harpers' 
publications appeared a story about a wonderful 
Chinese jewel called a Shay-lee. (The story was 
by James Payne.) Harrison obtained permission 
of Harper & Brothers to dramatize it. He really 
made an excellent play out of the material — so good 
that John Parselle offered him $500 and royalties 
for it. But, no, Frank saw millions in it. He would 
organize a company and produce it himself. 

With all the faith and enthusiasm of youth he 
walked out on "The Rialto" and picked up one of 
the most remarkable companies ever assembled in 
New York — men who had not had an engagement 
for years were rehearsing at last. 

A small theater uptown was engaged, a drop 
scene with plenty of pagodas was painted, and an 
interior of a Chinese jail. The town was billed for 
the new production. The actors were all paid a 
week's salary at the last rehearsal — for it was a 
cash-in-advance affair. When the curtain went up 
on the opening night the young author had just 
fifteen cents left in his pocket. 

"It's strange," he said to me as the audience filed 
in, "Don't you see that everybody in the house 
hails from Ireland, or at least their fathers before 
them?" 

Up went the curtain. There was a surprised mur- 

121 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

mur. What were those "pajodias" doing on the 
back drop? 

The fact was that "The Shaughraun," by Dion 
Boucicault, had taken the town by storm not very 
long before this. Of course the "Shay-lee" must be 
another Irish play; but here were a dozen singsong 
Chinamen and an English soldier, and a lot of 
pagodas that suggested nothing stronger than tea! 
It was a cruel hoax, and a howl went up from the 
audience that frightened the leading man so badly 
that he refused to come out in the second act, and 
his part had to be read by a scene painter. 

The poor "Shay-lee" died a victim to mistaken 
identity; for a perfectly good Chinese melodrama 
could claim no relation to Conn the Shaughraun. 

At the time when Abbey had a studio on Thir- 
teenth Street, which he shared with several other 
young artists, and my play-writing friend and I 
lived around the corner on Twelfth Street, we used 
often to meet in Brentano's little basement store on 
Union Square. Mr. Brentano was a little man, very 
much crippled by rheumatism, so that he could 
scarcely move; but he was enterprising beyond 
any book or periodical dealer of his day — he kept 
all the leading foreign periodicals and was particu- 
larly kind and helpful to the young artists. He 
allowed us to pore over his foreign illustrated papers 
and magazines without any obligation to purchase 
them. In fact, he invited us to look them over; 
and if by chance one had the price and bought a 
copy of Le Monde IllustrS in order to enjoy a Vierge 
masterpiece at leisure, he was sure of thanks at the 

122 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

cashier's desk. That little crippled gentleman was 
remembered with gratitude by Abbey and Reinhart 
and all the rest of that group for many long years. 

Every week when a steamer came in with Le 
Monde lUustri we used to meet at Brentano's to 
see what Vierge had to offer. Many a time I have 
seen half a dozen young fellows crowded about 
Abbey, who held the paper, as a center, commenting 
enthusiastically on the amazing effects of sunlight, 
where by the white paper's dazzle the great Spaniard 
had made magic somethings out of optical nothings. 
Then we would all disperse to our dens, there to 
dream dreams of being Daniel Vierges ourselves on 
some future day. 

I have previously referred to Ben Butler's advice 
to a young man : " Go into debt, young man ! Saddle 
yourself with a mortgage and pay it off!" and of 
how I followed it. My first transaction of this 
nature was with an upright and honorable man, but 
it isn't always that a young home builder is for- 
tunate enough to deal with a man of Roswell Smith's 
character. My second experiment was with a type 
which, unfortunately, flourishes in every community 
-one which lies ever in wait for the unwary. 

I had found a vacant lot in a near-by suburb. 
It was beautifully situated and was offered me at a 
very low price. It was a part of a large estate which 
was about to be cut up into small plots. The owner, 
finding that I intended to build at once, was pleased 
with the prospect, as it would add to the value of 
his remaining property. 

I could see that he was particularly delighted on 

123 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

finding he had an artist, innocent of the devious 
ways of business, to deal with. We had finally 
agreed on the price — I was surprised that my modest 
offer was finally accepted after I had satisfied him 
as to the style of house to be built on the lot. 

Then he assumed a fatherly tone and gave me a 
great deal of good advice as to contracts with build- 
ers — "a lot of sharks they were" — and finally warned 
me against another set of sharks — "lawyers." I 
recollect he always wore a very shiny silk hat, cal- 
culated to emphasize his position as a man of means; 
and when he talked he usually took it off and ges- 
tured with it. As this was a time when he wished to 
be particularly impressive, he waved it about as he 
warned me to beware of the real-estate lawyers who 
sent a ten-dollar-a-week clerk up to the Probate 
Court for half an hour to look up a title and then 
charged their client one hundred dollars for the 
search. 

"My dear boy," he said, "you know little of 
business. I am a man of wealth and my warranty 
deed has a quarter of a million dollars to back it 
up. You will not need to waste a penny on lawyers 
in this transaction." 

But, alas! how deceptive are appearances! The 
young and inexperienced artist with whom the old 
gentleman was dealing had once fallen foul of a 
panic — the great panic of 187S — and had been com- 
pelled to take a position for several years as book- 
keeper and assistant to the treasurer of one of the 
largest waterwheel and milling-machinery manu- 
factories in the country. 

124 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

For nearly three years I sent out mortgage notes 
every few days to mills all over the United States. 
The firm which employed me held mortgages on 
about one-third of all the mills in the Western states 
and many elsewhere, and at that time I knew the 
laws relating to mortgages in every state in the 
Union and the exemption laws in the Southern tier 
of states. I was as familiar with the laws of fore- 
closure, the flaws of titles, et cetera, as a clerk in any 
real-estate lawyer's office in the land. 

But how was a poor, innocent old land shark to 
know all that? I thanked him for his fatherly in- 
terest and proceeded at once to find out who, in that 
community, was the best-posted and most respon- 
sible lawyer; and, having found him, had him begin 
at once a search of title. In ten days we had dis- 
covered that a blanket mortgage for many thousand 
dollars covered the entire tract in which my lot was 
situated. Had I built a house upon it every dollar 
I put in it would have been swept away. 

My fatherly old friend came to see me in a hurry. 
He wore a pained expression under his shiny silk 
hat. I was allowing myself to be bamboozled by a 
firm of "skinflint lawyers," he told me. Why not 
trust to him who had every interest in seeing me com- 
fortably housed, where my improvement would so 
help his remaining property? What was a trifling 
blanket mortgage on property so valuable? 

It was really cruel to bring him down from the 

flowery land of humbug where he had flourished so 

long, but I felt the time had come to tell him not 

to trust too blindly to surface appearances; and I 

125 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

related to him how fate had thrown me into an 
unwilling knowledge of the mortgage laws of the 
entire United States, including an experience in 
foreclosures and flaws of titles in the very state 
in which he and I were attempting to do business 
together. I must say the old fellow was a pretty 
"good sport," for when he knew he was beaten he 
made good his title and helped me fix up a very 
decent bargain with my builder. 

Perhaps this old gentleman and his silk hat have 
no place in a series of sketches purporting to be of 
things and people worth while, but I have included 
him as a warning to any homeseeking young artists 
who may read this book. 



CHAPTER IX 

IN the palmy days of Puck, that little magazine 
was full of vital energy, and talents of many 
kinds met in its pages. The saucy little figure 
on the cover, clothed only in a silk hat and armed 
with a pencil, would have scoffed at any suggestion 
of Puck posing as a "highbrow" publication. And 
yet "Our Colored Contemporary," as Life airily 
called it, had for its editor one of the most culti- 
vated literary artists of his day, 

I have no recollection of making H. C. Bunner's 
acquaintance. It seems to me I always knew him. 
At any rate, we knew each other on sight. 

He had one of those crystal-clear minds which 
take up understandingly one's imperfectly expressed 
thoughts. I always felt with him that he was lis- 
tening to what I meant rather than to what I said. 
We made a little journey together once to New 
London. Will Carey, a young man of brilliant wit, 
junior editor of the Century, accompanied us. 
Though ostensibly we were going to see a boat race 
on the Thames, I found, on our arrival in New 
London, that the real object of our visit was to see 
as much as possible of a very delightful family by 
the name of Learned. 

127 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

A great many people will remember quaint verses 
in the back pages of the Century Magazine by Walter 
Learned. You felt in them the impress of a cultured 
and gently philosophic mind. Walter was well 
worth knowing, and on our way up to New London 
I recollect that Carey and Bunner talked about 
him a great deal. 

When we arrived in New London I discovered that 
Walter was by no means the entire attraction for 
my young companions. I verily believe the two 
rascals had brought me along to talk to him while 
they talked to his charming sisters. 

It is unfortunate that a mistranslation of "Kultur" 
has spoiled for us the word "culture." There is no 
word that so described the atmosphere of the Learned 
household. Imagine — in the days when "Rah! 
Rah! Rah!" was the intellectual cry of the under- 
graduate — imagine a family whose everyday songs 
were the old English ballads of the time of Queen 
Anne. 

Of an evening, out in the deepening twilight, some 
one would start up such an old song as Abbey 
would have delighted to illustrate, and the whole 
family would join in the chorus. It was the com- 
monplace of their lives, as natural to them as college 
songs are to other people of less fine fiber. Some of 
Bunner's most beautiful short stories were inspired 
in this atmosphere. 

I recollect Bunner's telling me that the incidents 

in "A Red Silk Handkerchief" were real happenings 

and the characters real people; and after my visit 

to New London I was very sure I knew the source of 

128 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

some pretty sentiments which took on even greater 
beauty through their shaping by his subtle art. 

Mr. John Harper has been kind enough to loan 
me a sketch of Bunner's old friend, Will Carey, by 
Stanley Reinhart. Carey was known and much 
beloved in New York during his short life, and this 
hitherto unpublished picture will, I am sure, give 
pleasure to many people. 

Here is what Judge Henry E. Howland wrote in 
1904 of Will Carey and Stanley Reinhart's sketch 
of him: "It is a charming reminder of one of the 
most delightful characters I ever came in contact 
with — genial, unselfish, sunny-tempered, with a wit 
of the finest edge tempered with such kindness that it 
never caused a wound; and such a loyal friend that 
one could always be sure of him in any stress of 
fortune." 

Bunner's span of life was also a short one; but, 
like Theodore Roosevelt, he lived as much in one 
year as most people do in two. In point of accom- 
plishment Bunner lived a full life. He set a high 
standard for the short-story writer. His "Short 
Sixes" and such stories as "Love in Olde Cloathes" 
are marvels of an easy style founded on an inner 
structure of infinite care. 

A roster of Puck contributors in the days just 
referred to would fill this page with names worth 
while. Keppler, Opper, Taylor, Harry Leon Wilson, 
W. J. Henderson, Munkittrick, perfect versifier and 
humorist of high degree — these are but a few of the 
bright minds that made Puck a living power. This, 

however, is not a volume of Who 9 a Who, but only a 

129 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

modest attempt to give a few pen pictures of people 
as I knew them. 

Puck gave an outlet for a certain quality of satir- 
ical humor which James L. Ford possessed, or, may- 
be, was possessed by. At any rate, Ford couldn't 
help saying and writing things which bit deep into 
any kind of humbug that came under his observa- 
tion. This gift of "Jim" Ford's came to its flower 
a little later on, in a book called The Literary Shop, 
which, I venture to say, is now a classic. It was 
freely predicted when this book was published that 
James L. Ford had written his own death warrant 
so far as his chances of ever having anything printed 
in a magazine or book in New York were concerned. 
But the publishers of New York, who were unmer- 
cifully pilloried in this book and exposed with mighty 
little to cover their naked faults, could not help 
laughing at themselves and their neighbors who 
appeared in such a ridiculous plight before the world. 
Who can ever forget "The Poet's Strike" in "The 
Franklin Square Prose and Verse Foundry?" And 
"Henry Rondeau," who broke it? Yet I have 
noticed a Franklin Square imprint on several books 
by James L. Ford since. 

When was there anything written about the mak- 
ing of a magazine to equal his account of the plot to 
ruin William Sonnet, foreman, I think, in the 
"Empire Prose and Verse Foundry" of Hacken- 
sack? Somebody had filed off the burr from a 
Scotch-dialect story intended for the columns of 
the Century Magazine! No magazine of promin- 
ence, or editor, or publisher escaped without a sting 

180 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of the lash in this most amusing account of the shops 
where literature was turned out or turned down. 

In spite of James L. Ford's accurate reports of the 
large business carried on by Messrs. Prose and 
Prosody in machine-made magazine articles, Ford 
himself and a score of other young writers who did 
44 hand work" were making themselves felt in the 
'eighties and 'nineties. 

There was young John Kendrick Bangs writing 
The House-Boat on the Styx — paragraphing for the 
daily press, joking for the weeklies, writing edi- 
torials — quite a busy young fellow; and there were 
Henry Guy Carleton and Guy Wetmore Carryl, 
Harry Leon Wilson, George Ade, and Eugene Field. 

Bangs, more than all the others, kept closely in 
touch with current events; and as my work as a 
cartoonist carried me into similar fields we were 
often closely associated. In all political movements 
Bangs was to be found exercising an independent 
judgment, taking sides as conscience or reason 
demanded. Like Davy Crockett, he always acted 
on the precept "Be sure you're right — then go 
ahead!" 

There are many people, especially in the pro- 
fessions, who claim to be independent in politics, 
but who are really neutral — which means that they 
count for nothing. There is a considerable diver- 
gence between a Declaration of Independence and 
a Declaration of Indifference. Having once taken 
sides in politics, Bangs fought to win; no weak- 
kneed measures appealed to him. He was never a 
compromiser or trimmer. I was associated with 

131 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

him in more than one campaign and always felt a 
sense of security when I had him to stand with me 
or to back me up. 

No chronicle of the worth-while people of the 
past few years would be complete without a little 
story or two of Oliver Herford. He and I were 
among the early contributors of Life, and we used to 
get together every now and then. Of course, a 
great many stories are told of him which he would 
not recognize, but if he ever reads this one I am 
sure the incident will come back to his mind. 

I was waiting for a train at the Grand Central 
Station, being at that time an unfortunate com- 
muter, when I saw Oliver impatiently pacing up 
and down. He was on his way to the White Moun- 
tains and had an hour to put in until train time. 
In those days the package department at the station 
was a small affair, presided over by a very crabbed 
old gentleman who had charged Oliver thirty cents 
for checking a bag, umbrella, and package a few 
days before, which Oliver thought was an imposi- 
tion. He begged me to keep him company until the 
White Mountain Express was ready, and we chatted 
awhile until the gates opened. Then Oliver gravely 
took a check out of his pocket and we approached 
the package stand. I saw the crabbed old gentle- 
man give Oliver a look which, had it been a knife, 
would have cut his throat, but Oliver handed him 
the check and very sweetly asked for his package. 

The old man produced a suitcase. Attached to 
it hung a piece of heavy twine which extended back 
behind the counter. Hauling this in, he brought 

132 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

forth a book firmly tied in a loop of the twine; an 
umbrella came next, securely tied to the book; 
then a magazine, a second magazine, and a cane, 
each with about a yard of twine trailing after it. 
And last of all came a quart bottle of a liquid to be 
mentioned now only in connection with a doctor's 
prescription. Oliver gathered up all these various 
parts of a single package and handed the old gentle- 
man, whose face was now a deep purple, the sum of 
ten cents. 

It is singular how, in spite of such instances as 
this, the delusion persists that authors and artists 
have no business instincts. But the humorous 
pranks that Oliver Herford has performed and the 
wit which has gilded so many of his sayings have 
almost obscured the really extraordinary things 
which he has done. His caricature portraits, with 
their quaint verses attached, are, to my mind, of a 
higher order than anything ever before done in that 
vein. So, too, his book The Gentle Art of Pen and 
Ink, a satire on the "society artist," so deliciously 
funny that even our society artist-in-chief must 
have laughed at the antics of Herford's "Bertie," 
who fell into the sea in evening clothes and could 
not be rescued until 6 p.m. In everything Oliver 
Herford draws, no matter how trifling the subject, 
there lurks the intangible something which makes it 
art. 

In these days we hear a great deal about Green- 
wich Village; and not all that we hear is to the 
credit of that section of New York. It seems a 

great pity to one who lived in the real Greenwich 

188 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Village years ago to see an old stronghold of truest 
Americans exploited as the home of a bohemianism 
entirely foreign to this country. The Bolsheviki in 
art, literature, and politics have fastened on the 
fringe of Washington Square and given it the name 
of Greenwich Village. The real village lay much to 
the west of the square, and, so far as I can remember, 
only one real bohemian ever lived in it. 

He was of a type so different from the professional 
bohemian of the Washington Square neighborhood 
of to-day that I hesitate to give him that designa- 
tion. In all that went to make a good citizen, an 
artist to his fingertips in his chosen field of litera- 
ture, a clean-cut gentleman who yet elected to live 
his life in his own way, a true bohemian in his tastes 
— that was Thomas A. Janvier. He lived for many 
years in a little house on Seventh Avenue. You 
approached it through a rickety gate and up a little 
brick walk. It had porches and balconies on each 
floor, and in the spring the wistaria blossomed about 
his windows. Janvier was a tall, good-looking man 
with features that were strong and yet of extraor- 
dinary beauty. His little apartment resembled a 
bookstall. From floor to ceiling every room, with 
the possible exception of the kitchen, was piled with 
books, books, and more books. 

I remember seeing Janvier standing on the west 
side of Union Square one day, waiting for one of 
those little blue "bobtail" cars that ran in eccentric 
fashion from somewhere on the East River over to 
the Christopher Street ferry. As was his usual 
custom, Janvier was dressed immaculately — black 

134 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

cutaway coat, striped trousers, silk hat, etc. On 
either side of him were two immense piles of old 
books, bound mostly in pigskin and tied together 
with ropes. Mr. Janvier told me he had just attended 
an auction sale of old Spanish books on Fourth 
Avenue, had spent all his money, and had nothing 
left to hire a wagon to carry home his plunder. 
There was your true bohemian — totally uncon- 
scious of anything unconventional in carrying home 
by hand a drayload of valuable books. 

Some of my most delightful days of that period 
were spent in his company searching out picturesque 
and quaint material in old Greenwich and Paisley 
villages for the pictures and text of a book on Old 
New York. 

I have always had a soft spot in my heart for men 
who order their lives after a pattern which they have 
devised for themselves. Thomas A. Janvier was of 
this rare sort. Here is the story of another. At one 
time I occupied a studio on Lafayette Place in old 
"Colonnade Row." That was in the 'eighties. 
Early one afternoon a visitor came to my door. 
Daniel Boone at the age of nineteen must have 
looked much like the boy who stood there. To be 
sure, he lacked the traditional buckskin jacket, but 
he wore a coonskin cap and carried a long-barreled 
squirrel rifle. His shirt was of blue flannel and his 
tweed trousers were tucked into his boots. He 
introduced himself through the name of a mutual 
friend, and then he began to talk. 

The boy's voice was musical; he expressed him- 
self remarkably well, and one instantly felt the pres- 

135 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

ence of a mind entirely out of the ordinary. He 
told me of his journey on foot from his home on the 
shores of Lake Erie, through the mountains of 
Pennsylvania, living, just as old Daniel Boone 
lived, on the products of the forest and of the streams. 
Then he drew a little book from the pouch in which 
he carried his belongings — a book which he said had 
been company for him on his journey. Most nat- 
urally and without the shadow of a pose he began 
to read aloud. The book was a volume of Keats, 
and the story "Endymion." We were soon far away 
from our surroundings, when suddenly I saw my 
visitor's hand tremble. The book fell to the floor 
and the boy toppled over in a faint. He had walked 
twenty miles that morning on a very light break- 
fast and had entirely forgotten about luncheon. 

It must not be supposed that there was anything 
eccentric about this young artist. When he came to 
live in the city he was as careful of all its conven- 
tions as anyone, but he lived his ideals more nearly 
than any man I knew; he has always lived them, 
and now holds, through the integrity of his work, a 
very high place among the landscape painters of 
to-day. I hope Mr. W. L. Lathrop will pardon this 
little sketch of his picturesque entrance to New 
York, for it has always been a delight to me to recall 
the youthful enthusiasm which made him forget 
everything but art. 

One of the things that is hardest to reconcile 

oneself to, as we look on the world about us, is the 

apparent waste of good lives. Probably a more 

useful American citizen than Frank Millet would 

186 




FOItT GABBY, MANITOBA, IN 1878 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

have been hard to find while he lived. And yet he 
was chosen as one to die in the Titanic disaster. 
From his earliest boyhood up to the very last he 
was bubbling over with vitality and love of life and 
everything in the world that made life worth while 
to a man of fine instincts. 

It was impossible to talk with him without catching 
some of his enthusiasm. He had what is generally 
termed executive ability, but I should call it mag- 
netism. When he occupied positions where subor- 
dinates were to carry out his plans, as, for instance, 
at the Chicago Exposition, where he was director of 
decorations, he kept everyone about him in a state 
of enthusiasm. They did prodigious things out 
there, which they would never have undertaken 
save under the spell of his personality. 

Frank Millet had also a fine vein of humor in his 
make-up. It stood him in good stead one day at the 
Exposition. "England's Day" was approaching 
and some Irish patriots declared they would haul 
down every English flag on the Administration 
Building on that day. They waited on Millet the 
evening previous and declared it their intention to 
prevent the British emblem from flying over the 
principal buildings. Frank Millet smiled an enig- 
matic smile at and with his visitors, and they went 
away feeling that at heart he was with them. 

The next morning British flags flew from every 
available pole, and in the early dawn groups of in- 
censed "patriots" rushed the guards and swarmed 
to the roofs of the buildings, determined to haul 
down the offending banners. But there were no 

137 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

ropes attached to any of the flags, for Frank Millet 
had commandeered every steeplejack on the grounds 
the night before, and they had carefully nailed the 
flags to the masts. It was such a huge joke on the 
"patriots" that they could not help seeing its 
humorous side; and "England's Day" passed off 
without any untoward incident. 

As a rule, these impressions of people I have 
known have been confined to men whose activities 
made them figures in the events of a past generation, 
but in a little talk I had with Mr. Booth Tarkington 
a short time ago he put himself back into the class 
of the "old-timers" in such a delightful way that it 
would be shame to leave him out of this honorable 
company. 

Tarkington said, as nearly as I can recall his words: 
"You caused me a great deal of trouble when I was 
a youngster; it was a close study of your drawings 
reproduced in the early numbers to Life that fired 
me with an ambition to become an illustrator. 

"I used to copy them over and over until I thought 
I knew the trick; then I sent in a drawing of Life 
which, to my surprise and joy, the editor accepted, 
and for which I received thirteen dollars. I felt 
that my fortune was made, and I produced thirty 
more drawings — all of which were rejected. It was 
thus I was driven to my present laborious occupa- 
tion, which hasn't the joy of yours. 

"When one draws all day he has something to 

show for his effort, something to look at; but when 

one has spent a long day at his desk with his pen, 

when evening comes he has before him only a pile of 

138 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

sheets of paper, each sheet just like all the others, 
and all of them covered with little pen marks which 
only mar the beauty of the white paper." 

It would be a very interesting problem to specu- 
late upon what the result would have been had 
Booth Tarkington made the thirty-first drawing. 
It is possible that we might have had a very notable 
artist to add to our list, but how many thousands of 
people would have missed the wonderful pictures 
painted with those little homely pen marks on many 
sheets of white paper! 

When I was a youngster one of my schoolmates 
in Ohio moved with his family to Kansas. He was 
the captain and catcher in our baseball team and we 
missed him mightily. His family had previously been 
very well off, but fortune frowned upon his father, 
and when Frank McLennan arrived in Emporia he 
was glad to get a job as printer's devil. It wasn't 
so many years before he owned the Emporia Gazette. 

He sold it and later it was bought by William 
Allen White. McLennan bought the Topeka State 
Journal, which he still owns. While on a visit to 
him, during a political campaign, I met a few of the 
great Kansans. 

There was that fine old pessimist, "Ed" Howe, 
who wrote the story of Joe Errol's downfall in The 
Story of a Country Town, and who, as editor of a 
small Kansas newspaper, was more frequently 
quoted than any editor in the country. I have 
called Howe a fine old pessimist because his pessi- 
mism has a quality of delightful humor running 

through it like a thread of gold. 

139 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Then I had a day with Eugene Ware (Ironquill), 
who wrote "The Washerwoman's Song." In that 
and many of the Rhymes of Ironquill you feel the 
mind that sees much but believes only a little. It 
seems odd that Kansas, young and free, should give 
us two such men, to whom the world looks old and 
a trifle wrinkled. But then there is William Allen 
White (his neighbors call him "Bill"). He looks 
out on life and finds it good. I went down to Em- 
poria one day to see him. The impression I carried 
away was of a big, sound, red apple; the kind they 
put on the top of the barrel to make you believe 
they are all like that; but they are not, and don't 
let anyone make you believe Kansas is full of "Bill" 
Whites. They are rare anywhere. 

He has done much for Kansas. It isn't always the 
men who build with brick and mortar who make a 
city or a commonwealth. A new country has need 
of the "Bill" Whites to inspire and the "Ironquills" 
and "Ed" Howes to guide and criticize. 

I was glad to know them all, and so to know 
Kansas better. 

Along about 1906 I was hammering away at my 
daily cartoon in the Herald with the feeling, per- 
haps, of "the man with a hoe"; a daily task was 
there to be done. But as I looked down one row and 
up the next I felt my potatoes were very small, and 
there came over me a sort of despair of ever accom- 
plishing anything worth while. One day while in 
this mood I picked up an evening paper and in it 
saw a letter from John La Farge. The letter con- 
tained a complimentary reference to a cartoon of 

140 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

mine in the Herald. It had never occurred to me 
that a man like John La Farge would even look at 
the drawings of a workaday cartoonist in a daily 
paper, and it was almost like an electric shock to 
find appreciation in such a quarter. 

If one of the angels from a La Farge stained-glass 
window had with the tips of its wing brushed the 
shoulder of "the man with a hoe," he could not have 
gone at his task again with more renewed strength 
and courage than I went at mine. For years after 
the thought often came to me, "This is only 
my daily work, but I must make it good enough to 
pass muster with John La Farge." I wrote him a 
very brief letter thanking him and expressing sur- 
prise that he had even seen my everyday work. I 
had never supposed it would interest anyone whose 
art was on a plane so high as his. I received, soon 
after, a letter from him, which I shall quote in part : 

I do not wish to allow you to imagine myself upon some 
higher path, as you imply. To me all the paths are important; 
and what you do I have tried to appreciate in words, to imply 
that this daily task of yours has called upon all the powers of the 
artist; the imaginative faculty; the knowledge of fact and its 
expression in a special manner of drawing; a quality of line and 
composition and, of course, a something unexplained which is 
perhaps still more important and to which I can only allude. 

Yours sincerely, 

John La Fabgb. 

From that time on Mr. La Farge would every 
now and then write me in regard to some cartoon 
which interested him. A grotesque figure made out 

141 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of a rake and called "The Muck Rake" brought a 
page letter from him. Only one who has toiled at a 
daily task with pen or pencil can fully appreciate 
what a noble help a word of encouragement is now 
and then from a master of his art. So without shame 
I have set down what John La Farge wrote me, the 
correspondence surely being a credit to him, as well 
as to me, on account of its generous spirit. 

I wish I had a stenographic report of a conversa- 
tion with John La Farge back in the prewar period 
when we had a little more time to think. He referred, 
as he had done in his letter, to his belief that all 
walks of art were important. It is impossible to 
quote him exactly, for even in a casual talk such as 
this was, his command of the right word and the 
perfectly constructed sentence was remarkable. This 
is, however, in substance, what he said: 

"The public are misled greatly by the possibili- 
ties of actual representation in oil painting; and the 
painter in the oil medium has taken advantage of 
this to arrogate to himself the title of artist. Yet 
the painter in water-color exercises far more skill, 
must be far more resourceful, and, in the end, with 
his simple means, often suggests more than the oil 
painter is able to represent. The Japanese are good 
examples of this art of suggestion with a few simple 
tones and lines. When one is restricted to the line, 
as in etching and in pen drawing, the artist's power 
of suggestion is put to a supreme test. 

"Many a young man," he continued, "imagines 
that holding a paint brush in his hand makes him 
an artist, but I feel that a mastery of the line which 

14* 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

suggests what is left out of the picture is one of the 
greatest of arts." 

It will be seen later on how closely two great 
masters in their respective fields, John La Farge 
and Joseph Jefferson, agreed as to what constituted 
the highest form of art — "suggestion rather than 
representation." 

It has always seemed to me an inestimable privi- 
lege to have had these expressions direct from two 
such consummate artists in their different profes- 
sions; and I intend to pass them on as clearly as it is 
possible to reflect, in an imperfect mirror, the 
thoughts of two great men. 



CHAPTER X 

THERE are some men whom you greatly admire 
and about whom you can write with a clear 
judgment and feel, when you have done, that 
the picture is true and does fair justice to the sitter. 
But when I think of John A. Mitchell — "the Gen- 
eral/ 9 we all affectionately called him in the old 
days — it is with a sense that I shall never be able 
to delineate even poorly his remarkable personality. 
Life had been in existence only a very short time 
when I climbed the long staircase at number 1155 
Broadway and found Mr. Mitchell in a curious 
mixture of studio, editorial room, and publication 
office. 

Anyone who knew him in later life would have 
found him about the same then. He looked pretty 
nearly the same age to the end of his life. He had 
the same smile with a little nervous jerk in the 
middle of it. He had the same love for capable 
work and the same kindly friendship for the capable 
worker that characterized him to the end. 

I made cartoons for his paper for a little more 
than a year. At first he could afford to pay only a 
small price — and even so I had often to wait as 
much as a month for my check. There was one week 
when Life came very near breathing its last. There 

was no money to pay the printer — a strictly cash 

144 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

proposition. Mr. Mitchell has, I think, told the story 
of how he and Andrew Miller raised the necessary 
twelve or fifteen hundred dollars; so I will only say 
that within a few months after this crisis the paper 
began to pay. Immediately "the General" doubled 
my check for the cartoon, and did it with such a 
pleased gesture that it was worth much more on 
that account. 

One day, when prosperity was becoming more and 
more a reality, I had brought in a cartoon, and 
Mitchell suggested that we go to the St. James on 
Twenty-ninth Street for luncheon. We sat there for 
quite a long time, "the General" evidently in a 
curious state of expectancy, but for what I could 
not tell. Finally a boy came in with a message for 
him and we went out to the Broadway entrance. 
A very smart little rig was drawn up at the curb, 
and at the horses' heads stood a groom. Mitchell 
looked at me quizzically and said, "Jump in, young 
Rogers!" (I was always "young Rogers" to him); 
and in we climbed. 

Mitchell had always wanted a pair of horses to 
drive and this was the realization of his desire. The 
next week my check was a little larger, for "the 
General " was never one to hide in a corner and eat 
his cake alone. 

One day Mitchell seemed particularly thoughtful. 
I saw he was turning something over in his mind. 
This I tell to show the breadth and bigness of the 
man. He said at last: 

"Do you know you and I are engaged in a hazard- 
ous business? We are using a dangerous weapon. 

145 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

To strike at fraud and wrongdoing, at folly and all 
that, is, of course, a good and useful thing to do. 
But the weapon, satire, is a double-edged sword, 
and poisoned at that. We must do something to 
counterbalance the tendency toward being cynical, 
or we are lost. What natural sweetness and gener- 
osity we have will dry up. Life must take its part 
in some good undertaking; I don't know exactly 
what, as yet, but I am going to think it out — some- 
thing to do with children. You have made pictures 
for children; you must somehow use that faculty 
for us." 

From that conversation came an institution, Life 9 * 
Fresh Air Fund. Several months afterward Mr. 
Mitchell and I went up to Branchville, Connecticut, 
where he had hired an old mansion and its grounds 
as a place to send little waifs of the streets for a 
breath of fresh air. We walked about the place and 
he said he felt sure it would fill the bill; but what to 
call the place he did not know. I suggested Life's 
Farm and I have always been proud of the fact that 
Life's Farm it was from that day. 

On one occasion a rather worthless fellow applied 
to Mitchell for help. It was by no means the first 
time, and some of us, who knew the circumstances, 
protested against Mitchell going to his assistance. 
We felt he was being imposed upon and insisted 
that the man was unworthy. 

"I know he is unworthy," Mitchell said; "you 
can't tell me anything against the man that I 
do not know; but, after all, isn't it the unworthy 
who need our help the most?" It is easy to pick a 

146 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

flaw in Mitchell's reasoning here, and yet to me no 
statement of our duty to our fellow-man has ever 
shone out with such a calm light of pure charity. 

The little waifs who have been taken out into the 
fields and woods by the different "Fresh Air" insti- 
tutions have always had a strong place in my affec- 
tions. I first came in contact with them when I 
went to the Bivington Street Newsboys' Home to 
make sketches for the Daily Graphic. It was pre- 
sided over at that time by Mr. Calder and his wife, 
two of the biggest-hearted people I ever met. The 
poor little newsboys used to suffer a lot from sore 
throats. Their shoes were often more like sieves 
than shoes, so Mrs. Calder got a prescription from 
a good doctor for just such cases. She had a quan- 
tity of the mixture put up and gave out word to all 
the boys to bring bottles the next day for a supply 
of the medicine. 

The next day a row of the little ragamuffins lined 
up before her. One had brought a quart whisky 
bottle, another a homoeopathic pill bottle, another a 
shaving mug, and one a tin dinner pail. These little 
waifs of the streets, boys and girls, in whom one 
would think every higher instinct must have been 
trampled out in the fierce fight to keep alive, have 
really a remarkable sense of appreciation. I know 
them well, for I spent many a hot summer day in the 
tenements with doctors of the Health Department 
or tramping about on my own account. For instance, 
the love of nature, of the forest, and the greenwood 
tree never dies in the hearts of these youngsters. 
Once I saw a little Maying party in the most arid 

147 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

region of the slums. The May queen carried a 
broomstick decorated with colored paper streamers, 
for a Maypole. The small boy who led the pro- 
cession knew where there was a tree and they were 
aiming for that. Dodging among the heavy trucks 
at the street crossings, the little captain led his band 
through a maze of crooked streets. I followed them, 
and at last they reached the tree — a stunted, broken, 
crooked wreck of a tree, and on its gnarled branches 
perhaps a dozen leaves to shade this brave company. 
But it was the only living vestige of the wildwood 
within their reach, and the sure young instinct of 
these little children clothed it with all the charm of 
romance. 

On one intensely hot summer's day I accompanied 
two young Health Department doctors in an inspec- 
tion of tenements in New York. We took in one of 
the worst sections of the city — old houses with many 
rooms as dark as the Styx. One of these young doc- 
tors and I found ourselves in the home of a poor 
woman newly arrived from the other side. She was 
evidently very devout, for her walls were covered 
with cheap prints of religious designs. The two rooms 
she occupied had scarcely any ventilation, and the 
air was stifling. Her baby was sick. She brought 
it from a dark closet, and the poor, emaciated little 
creature was pitiful to see. She held the babe up 
for the doctor to examine. I can never forget seeing 
him bury his fine, clean head in that mass of rags 
as he listened to the faint heartbeats of the tiny 
infant. 

Not a particle of disgust disturbed the kindly ex- 

148 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

pression of his face as he told the poor mother what 
to do. I made a picture of this little scene for Har- 
per's Weekly and in a short time forgot all about it. 
Nearly thirty years afterward a well-known physi- 
cian rang me up on the telephone and asked me if I 
remembered spending a day many years ago in the 
slums with two young "medicos." He was one of 
them, and the other, he said, had recently died. 
The widow had always remembered the picture of 
her husband, and after his death felt a great desire 
to own the original drawing. The drawing had been 
made on the wood block; so it, of course, was de- 
stroyed in the process of engraving. But by the 
merest chance I found an artist's proof of the 
engraving in fair condition. It was a rather singular 
fact that this was the only artist's proof of a Harper's 
Weekly drawing which I had preserved, and it was 
a great satisfaction to have it go where it might 
be a source of comfort. 

One night, a long time ago, I stood on the side- 
walk looking at a group of Salvation Army people 
in the street. It was a murky night, the street was 
muddy and steaming, and the usual crowd had 
gathered when the cymbals crashed and the old 
cracked cornet blared out of time. The flat booming 
of a bass drum, which sadly needed stringing up, 
smote my ears in a way to arouse every particle of 
prejudice against such a coarse, common, inartistic 
band of ignorant fanatics. 

An old woman stood near me, on the sidewalk, 

who looked the worse for many long years of close 

association with the gin bottle; the rest of the 

149 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

crowd were the riffraff and scourings of the gutter 
and a few poor creatures whose prowling place is the 
street. The scene of this tawdry little picture of the 
Salvation Army at work was in one of the filthiest 
slums in the city of New York. 

I asked myself the question: Can this be religion? 
Can this brutal music, these ignorant exhorters, do 
anything to save this hopeless, sodden mass of 
humanity? I felt irritated at the futility of it all 
and aggrieved at the horrible bass drum. Then 
suddenly I heard a smothered scream ; a poor street- 
prowling girl had been smashed id the face by some 
brute in the crowd. A young woman in the costume 
of the "Army," who had taken no part in the service 
up to this time, walked to the center of the circle. 
She was a rather handsome young woman, and there 
was something in the way she wore her uniform 
and her poke bonnet which distinguished her from 
her companions. 

Without a moment's hesitation she knelt down in 
the muddy street, and all the circling band knelt 
likewise. The drum and cornet were silenced. The 
young woman raised her hand in an impressive 
gesture and held it there. For a moment not a sound 
could be heard except a sob from the poor girl who 
had been struck in the face. Then began a prayer 
for that poor creature which was of a beauty and 
eloquence such as I have seldom heard. Not until 
the last word was uttered did the Salvation lassie 
lower her hand. With rare hypnotic power she had 
held the crowd of derelicts, made them feel their 
souls struggling, for a moment at least, for freedom 

150 




WILL CAREY 
by C. S. Heinhart 




A FEW ATTEMPTS TO PENETRATE A GREAT MASK 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

from their covering of misery and sin. I saw one 
hard-faced woman across the circle throw her apron 
up over her face. Tears were trickling down the 
cheeks of my old gin-sodden neighbor. But the per- 
son who I was most sure had been deeply affected 
by that prayer was myself. 

At that time the Salvation Army was looked on 
by most people as a band of cranks who were a good 
deal of a nuisance on account of their noise, and who 
could not possibly do any good to the cause of real 
religion. For several months from that night I 
made a sympathetic study of the Salvation Army, 
attending the meetings in its Bleecker Street hall 
and watching its activities on the street. I used the 
incident just related as the subject for what I think 
was one of the first pictures published in this country 
which took the Salvation Army seriously. I found 
that in almost every band of Salvation Army work- 
ers there was at least one intelligent and often cul- 
tivated woman in those days; probably to-day the 
proportion is much greater. I recollect one cold 
winter night when the Bleecker Street hall was 
crowded. Many of the people gathered there, poor 
souls, were there because it was warm. That was 
just why the Salvation Army people wanted them to 
be there, had they but known it. 

The service was in progress; a hymn was being 

sung, when a man who had staggered in at the door, 

suddenly, in the unaccustomed warmth, became 

uproariously drunk and, springing from his seat, 

started up toward the platform, shouting foul and 

blasphemous words as he went. Halfway up the 

151 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

aide he collapsed and fell to the flow, frothing at 
the mouth. 

'Tut him out! Put him out!" came from all 
parts of the hall; and two or three husky fellows 
sprang up and started to drag him to the door. 
But the young woman who was leading the meeting 
bade them leave the poor wretch to her. She knelt 
down beside the ragged, drink-sodden creature, 
lifted up his head from the floor, and pillowed it on 
her knee. Then she took her handkerchief and 
wiped the froth from his lips. She had the three 
husky fellows who had started to drag him out 
carry him to a bench, where they laid him down 
carefully. If she had asked them to throw him out 
of the window they would have obeyed just as cheer- 
fully. Nevertheless, the beauty of her act of service 
was not lost on those rough characters, and there 
wasn't a man in that room, I imagine, who had 
ever heard a sermon which hammered as much true 
religion into his soul as did that little incident. 

When the Great War broke out the churches and 
the Y. M. C. A. and the various other organizations 
which undertook to ameliorate its horrors had to 
learn how, but the Salvation Army simply went on 
with its accustomed work, only transferring its 
activities from one sort of people to another — from 
the gutters and the slums to the camps and the 
trenches. 

There is a consistency in the methods of the 
Salvation Army which has always won my admira- 
tion. The little band never plays good music. It 

doesn't wish to attract a crowd of music lovers. 

15* 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Its work is among the lowest of the low. The bass 
drum is the biggest bait it has ever been able to find 
to attract the kind of people it wishes to reach. 

A Salvation Army band always stands in the 
gutter. That is partly so as not to obstruct the side- 
walk, but mainly, I believe, because it is typical of 
the humility of Him whose work the Army strives 
to carry on. 

The Salvation Army never preaches to a man 
with an empty stomach. That is the wisest thing 
it knows. 

What is called settlement work in the slums, the 
tenement district, or among the masses — whatever 
you choose to call the scene of its activities — is of 
two distinct kinds. The first — the original settle- 
ment work — was done by people who hated the slums 
but loved the poor unfortunates who were com- 
pelled to live in them. These fine, unselfish people 
left their homes and went down into the midst of 
squalor which tortured their nostrils and offended 
their eyes. The Calders, away back in the 'seventies 
in Rivington Street, Charles Loring Brace, and later 
Rose Hawthorne Lathrop — these and many others 
gave the best years of their lives to better the con- 
dition of the unfortunate, the sick, and the thriftless. 

But their example, unfortunately, stimulated the 
imagination of people of another type, those whose 
great desire in life is not to help, but to change. The 
rebuilder never appeals to the lazy idealist as 
does the radical reformer. Rebuilding is too much 
like work. The radical is happy only when he is 
tearing something down — something which may be 

153 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

imperfect, but which has stood the test of years. 
It is very much to be feared that a number of what 
might be called, not inappropriately, "unsettle- 
ment houses" have been established where they 
will do the most harm. 

The radical element which has taken up this 
mischievous work is largely made up of people who 
are not quite normal. They rather like the slums; 
yet they don't care a fig for the people who live in 
them. They are enamored of a host of crude ideas 
of government which can be most successfully propa- 
gated among the densely ignorant. There is an 
enormous difference between a fine, clean man or 
woman who hates filth and squalor, and yet endures 
both for the sake of a loving service, and the neurotic 
who hates conventional order and decency and 
goes among the poor and unfortunate to sow discord 
and unrest. 

One never hears of the Salvation Army trying to 
start a new form of government in the United States; 
yet it has worked among the poorest and most 
ignorant element of the people for forty years and 
has done more to improve the condition of the poor 
than all New York's radical reformers put together. 
Let us, who have too frequently passed by on the 
other side, speak in deep humility of Rose Haw- 
thorne Lathrop, who devotes her life to the care of 
the cancerous poor, a service which in self-sacrifice 
and courage deserves to rank with that of Father 
Damien on the island of Molokai. 

Helping the young in their struggle upward often 

carries its own joys and rewards, but to hold the 

154 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

withered hands of the hopeless, to minister to the 
dying and to the needs of those who cannot die — this 
is to become of the saints themselves. 

Long before I ever saw New York I came in con- 
tact with some of the work done by Mr. Brace and 
his organization for the welfare of the city's waifs. 
To my home town in Ohio he sent a boy with close- 
cropped, bristly head and hangdog air. What his 
history in New York had been could be read in his 
sullen eyes and browbeaten manner. Kicks and 
cuffs and cruel blows were about all he had ever 
known. Cal was the only name he brought with him; 
that and his memories were all he had to bring! 

Cal was taken in by two brothers, hackmen, rough- 
and-ready citizens, none too gentle in their manners. 
Cal used to duck his head whenever his new bosses 
spoke to him, expecting a blow. It took him a long 
time to get over that. 

When a boy accosted him it was different. Then 
his ugly little jaw shot forward and down over his 
beady eyes came his shaggy eyebrows. Cal was no 
coward; if the odds were at all even he was always 
ready for a fight. When he found at last that he 
wasn't to be beaten without cause, his devotion to 
his employers became a pathetic sight. Anyone but 
Cal would have considered them the hardest of task- 
masters. They drove Cal as hard as they drove 
their horses. Early and late the little fellow was on 
duty, but the boy loved them with a deep devotion. 
No stray dog rescued from the street could have 
been more loyal to his new master than Cal to the 

two rough hackmen. 

155 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Cal had been in our town two or three years 
before I ever saw him smile. Gradually his features 
improved; even his hair became smoother and less 
bristly; and he finally grew up into a decent, orderly 
citizen, honest and straight and well thought of by 
everyone. That is just one example of the work 
done by Mr. Brace in rescuing boys from intolerable 
surroundings and placing them where they had at 
least a fighting chance to grow up to be decent 
men. 

It is a great mistake, however, to imagine that a 
boy cannot grow up a good citizen right down in 
the tenement district of New York. I watched a 
group of boys one Saturday afternoon out in a 
wooded tract near the Grassy Sprain Brook in West- 
chester County. They were Boy Scouts out on a hike 
and had walked all the way from the northern 
terminus of the Subway, some nine miles, to the 
place where I observed them. 

It was in the autumn and the ground was thick 
with dry leaves. A spark would have started a rag- 
ing fire in a moment. The little band halted under 
some tall trees, gathered dry sticks, and prepared 
to build a fire. One boy hunted up an old tin can 
and filled it at the brook. He kicked away the leaves 
in a circle ten or fifteen feet in diameter and wetted 
the ground thoroughly at its edge, going many times 
to the brook for water. Then another boy whittled 
a bit of pine wood into a kindling stick in good 
woodcraftsman style. A fire was quickly made and 
a coffee pot suspended over it. Everything was done 
in an orderly manner and as effectively as Dan 

156 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

» 

Beard himself or any other old camper could have 
done it. 

I joined the group and directed them to where 
there was an excellent spring not far away. The 
little fellows soon told me all about themselves. Two 
of them were Jewish boys from Hester Street; an- 
other, named Tony, was an Italian; Slovak blood 
was evident in others. Only one or two of these 
boys were of native American parentage, and all 
came from a part of the city where the surroundings 
are of the worst. It was good to see what the Boy 
Scout organization had done to bring to life the 
love of nature, the latent decency, and the regard for 
the rights of others which are almost smothered in the 
fierce struggle for existence in tenement-house life. 

When they left the woods the little fireman of the 
band carefully drowned out the last embers of their 
camp fire. It would be interesting to know what 
the radical reformers of the Rand School type teach 
young East-Siders that is as valuable as the simple 
maxims of the Boy Scouts. 

Every now and then, after periods of stagnation, 

when it seems impossible that old conditions can 

ever be mended or done away with, along comes a 

man with an idea; and if he combines with it a 

strong executive personality the world moves. This 

combination never was stronger than in the late 

Col. George E. Waring. I remember one morning, 

when I was at work in my studio, a sharp knock 

took me to the door. A tall gentleman stood there, 

faultlessly dressed, straight as an arrow, his small 

mustache waxed. 

15T 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

"I am Colonel Waring/' he said, as I asked him 
in. "I have come to thank you for certain pictures 
you have made in Harper's Weekly of street and 
market improvements I am trying to put through/' 

My experiences in studying the life of the East 
Side had convinced me that certain projects of 
Colonel Waring's, reported in the daily papers, were 
on the right lines, and I had gone down to the 
places indicated and tried, in pictures, to visualize 
his ideas as though already in existence. 

This little graceful act of Colonel Waring's in 
coming to my place to express his thanks contains 
the secret of his success in carrying out his campaign 
against King Garbage and King Dirt, who had 
reigned for three hundred years on Manhattan 
Island. His idea in life was to give credit to everyone 
who was helping him. Before his day, not a soul 
had ever said a good word for the street scavenger. 
He was a pariah to his fellow citizens. In a single 
day, the day on which for the first time in the his- 
tory of New York the street cleaners paraded up 
Fifth Avenue in pure- white uniforms, the "pariah" 
became a self-respecting man. 

I well remember the howl of laughter that went 

up when Colonel Waring proposed the white-canvas 

uniform for the street cleaner. The New York Sun 

found it funnier than "The Stuffed Prophet " or any 

of its other standard jokes. When the parade was 

proposed the Sun suggested that Colonel Waring, 

having made spectacles of the men in their "White 

Wings" uniforms, ought to wear one himself. 

"Good idea," said the Colonel, and when the "White 

158 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Wings" marched up Fifth Avenue the colonel headed 
the procession, a splendid figure on horseback, clad 
in the pure-white uniform of a street cleaner. Not 
until the returning troops from Europe's battle- 
fields marched up the historic avenue in khaki 
has there been a parade which made such an im- 
pression as that first procession of the street cleaners. 
The Sun came out next morning with apologies for 
its past lack of understanding of Colonel Waring's 
great idea of creating self-respect among his work- 
ers, and from that day forth its influence was no 
longer a hindrance, but a help, to the colonel in his 
undertakings. 

After his visit to my studio I became very well 
acquainted with Colonel Waring and talked with 
him many times about his ambition to clean up 
Havana. That was the desire of his life. To end the 
reign of yellow fever in Havana and so protect our own 
Southern cities was the ideal on which he had set 
his heart, and to that desire he devoted the last 
years of his life and in the end gave up life itself, for 
yellow fever, which he was one of the great factors 
in destroying, took him as one of its last victims. 

I know no man to whom Theodore Roosevelt's 
words, "Let us pay with our bodies for our souls' 
desire," would apply more appropriately than to 
Colonel Waring. 

The colonel was a great smoker. I have watched 

him smoke one long black cigar after another, and 

one day he talked on the subject. But first let me 

say that he was then about sixty years of age, in 

perfect health, straight, and vigorous. 

159 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

"When I was a youngster, aged about twelve 
years," he said, "my father caught me with one of 
Jus cigars in my mouth. I had just lit it and had 
taken two or three puffs. My father asked me if 
it tasted good. I was a good deal frightened, but 
managed to say that it did. 

"'All right/ he said, "then smoke it to the end,' 
thinking, of course, it would sicken me. I smoked 
until only the butt was left. 

"'Well/ said my father, 'what have you got to 
say now?' I felt pretty dizzy, but I managed to 
brave it out, and replied, 'I'd like another!' Of 
course it made me sick, but I began smoking regu- 
larly soon afterward and have smoked ever since/' 

This story, I am afraid, will give no aid or com- 
fort to the theory that early smoking stunts a 
boy's growth, but it is true, and just as the colonel 
told it. 

When Thomas Nast invented a symbol to repre- 
sent a party or a principle it was generally so appro- 
priate that it could never be improved upon. To 
him we owe the elephant as the symbol representing 
the Republican party; and the tiger symbolizing 
Tammany Hall is a characterization which has 
stood the test of time. 

The "Tiger" to my certain knowledge, has been 

killed a number of times since I first made cartoons 

in Harper 9 s Weekly. Nast killed it the first time, and 

it was extremely dead for several years; but, being 

of the cat tribe, it had a number of lives yet to be 

lost before it should finally give up the ghost. I 

160 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

remember being in at the death of Tammany several 
times, giving what little aid I could in the way of 
cartoons to the powerful forces which were arrayed 
against Mr. Croker and later against Mr. Murphy. 

The trouble with the killing of Tammany lies in 
the fact that Tammany represents a vital element 
which exists in every large city. There must be 
some organization to take care of the poor and ignor- 
ant who are unable to manage their own affairs 
successfully. Tammany is the organization in New 
York which performs this necessary office. Not 
being an altruistic body, it requires payment for 
its service. All the poor and ignorant beneficiaries 
of Tammany have to offer is their votes; but this is 
no mean compensation, for it spells power. The 
mayoralty, the comptrollership, the courts, the 
police, and every branch of municipal government 
is in the hands of Tammany a good deal more than 
half the time. 

Unfortunately, the opponents of Tammany, who 
could really outvote that organization a great deal 
oftener than they do, have no deep roots extending 
down into the lower strata of the community. 
When Tammany becomes too outrageous in its 
administration of public affairs some association of 
citizens arises and fights the "Tiger" through one 
political campaign. If they win, that ends their 
interest in municipal politics until another crisis 
arises. But Tammany is at work all the time. 
The next day after it has lost an election it is already 
rebuilding from the bottom what has just tumbled 
about its ears. In this one characteristic Tammany 

161 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

could be well represented by a picture of a beaver — 
always working under the surface, eternally mending 
its dams when the floods have swept them away. 

There will never be recorded the final demise of 
Tammany until a society formed on the same lines, 
but altruistic in its motives and honest in its admin- 
istration, takes Tammany's place. It can hardly 
be called cynical to doubt if such a society could 
exist for long, but the next group of civic reformers 
who become imbued with an ambition to oust 
Tammany might try it to advantage. 

While the old Tammany methods bred a tribe of 
officeholders who had a tender regard for their own 
pockets, it also was responsible, through its very 
intimacy with all grades of citizens down to the 
lowest, for a number of excellent thief catchers in 
the past. Life on the streets of New York was 
certainly safe under Byrnes, Murray, Devery, and 
McLaughlin, largely because those officers were 
close to the people and knew where to locate pretty 
nearly every criminal in town. 

The Tammany of to-day seems to have lost some 
of its skill in this line of endeavor; perhaps the town 
has outgrown that intimate acquaintance with itself 
which made it possible for a police officer simply to 
order a certain type of thief to keep away from the 
financial center of the town with the assurance of 
being obeyed. In those days it was absolutely safe 
to walk the streets even in the slums at any reason- 
able hour. My work as an illustrator frequently 
took me into the worst quarters of the town at 
night, but I never was seriously molested. Now on 

162 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Fifth Avenue or Broadway in broad daylight a 
citizen is more likely to fall a victim to gun play or 
robbery than he was then in the "gas house district" 
at midnight. Some of those Tammany-trained thief 
catchers came a little high to the community, but 
perhaps, after all, they were worth the money. 

New York was in many ways a much more com- 
fortable place in those days than it is now. We 
hadn't nearly so many theaters then, to be sure, and 
we had no "movies," but you could see John Drew 
and Jimmy Lewis and Mrs. Gilbert and Ada Rehan 
all at once for a dollar and a half. Or you could go 
around the corner of Twenty-fourth Street to the 
little Madison Square Theater and see Tom Whiffen, 
Agnes Booth, Couldock, and Annie Russell for the 
same price. 

I have told some of the doings behind the scenes 
in the old Union Square Theater. In making the 
pictures for a little illustrated souvenir of the play, 
"Esmeralda," for the Madison Square Theater I 
had a good opportunity to see how a part is built 
up by a clever company who work harmoniously 
together. 

Miss Annie Russell was then just a slip of a girl 
and she came to the Madison Square Company, I 
am pretty sure, without any theatrical experience 
whatever. I saw her performance for a number of 
' nights, also rehearsals betweentimes. It was sur- 
prising, indeed, to see how a part could be enriched 
without changing a word. Little subtle intonations, 
an almost imperceptible emphasis, a little hesita- 
tion, or what appeared to be an accidental move- 

163 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

ment — all these made an enormous difference be- 
tween the first performance and that of a week or 
two later. 

It was a wonderful school of acting which Miss 
Russell fell into; and that extraordinary actress, 
Agnes Booth, recognizing her exceptional aptitude, 
put all her own great talents and experience at the 
service of "the child,"- as I often heard her call the 
younger actress. 

It was a pretty sight at rehearsals to see the 
company grouped about Miss Russell and the actor 
who played the part of her father. (Couldock 
played the part during a portion of the run, but was 
not in the cast just at that time.) They would go 
through the principal scenes over and over again, 
and it was easily to be seen that the whole company 
was charmed by the young actress who had so much 
to learn and was learning it so rapidly. The play, 
which really was very insignificant, ran for many 
months. 

It is dangerous to boast too much of "the good 
old times" when everything was better than it is 
now; but in the march of progress and economy in 
the production of magazines and books, one beau- 
tiful art, which flourished in France and America 
above all places in the world, has been trampled 
underfoot and is scarcely practiced at all to-day. 
The invention and perfection of mechanical repro- 
duction of drawings by the half-tone process of 
engraving made it a practical impossibility for 
publishers to continue the use of wood engravings. 

While no half-tone engraving has ever equaled the 

164 




<«r 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

best wood engraving, the average half tone was far 
superior to the average work on the block. The 
cost of a good, serviceable half tone was so much 
less than an engraving of equal merit that no pub- 
lisher could afford to go on with the old methods. 
It was thus that a wonderful art which had in 
America attained a perfection rivaled only by the 
French was killed almost overnight. 

As for the engravers, it was as though a black 
frost had cast its blight over a fair land in the very 
midst of harvest time. I knew personally a great 
many of these men, great artists of reproduction, 
sensitive as musicians, many of them men of educa- 
tion and culture. It was, indeed, a cruel fate which 
drove them from their beautiful art which had taken 
them years of infinite pains to perfect. 

W. J. Linton, an Englishman by birth, was, I 
think, the first great engraver in America. He had 
a peculiar "singing" line, somewhat resembling the 
line of the great French engraver Pannemacker, but 
with just a little more freedom if less mechanical 
perfection. I shall not attempt to name his suc- 
cessors in any chronological order, but among the 
early followers of Linton to attain a great place in the 
art was John S. Davis. Davis used to enter into the 
very spirit of the illustrator whose drawings he inter- 
preted on the block. When he engraved your draw- 
ing you felt much the same satisfaction that Mark 
Twain felt when he saw his characters in Pudd'nhead 
Wilson walking on the stage. You felt he had lost 
nothing, perhaps had added a great deal. 

Smithwick was also one of the engravers whose 

1G5 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

work added charm to the drawing it reproduced. 
His associate for many years, French, was another 
engraver whose work had a distinct flavor of its 
own. Smithwick was particularly strong in the 
reproduction of drawings on a large block, in which 
he succeeded in preserving a perfect scale of light 
which illuminated the whole engraving. I knew Mr. 
Smithwick intimately for many years. He was a 
tall, broad-shouldered, good-looking Irishman of an 
extremely fine type — the most sensitive, high- 
strung character I ever met. A careless word of 
criticism of his work would drive him to despair or 
anger, depending on his mood at the time, and an- 
other more just or careful word would instantly 
restore his balance. In all his work he was one of 
the most conscientious of engravers. One had only 
to approach him with a little tact, giving him always 
to understand that one had absolute confidence in 
him, to work with him in perfect harmony. 

Tinkey was another engraver who reproduced a 
drawing in a sweet and silky line and rich texture. 
A little later on came Juengling, an extraordinary 
and artistic engraver who got out of the wood block 
certain qualities of rich color (black and white has 
its effect of color) never before dreamed of as pos- 
sible. All during the great period of wood engraving 
Kingsley and Cole practiced their splendid art and 
with Wolff survived the cataclysm that swept away 
so many of their comrades. 

The reproduction of pen drawings by mechanical 
means — direct process, or photoengraving — was 
brought to a great state of perfection about twenty- 

166 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

five or thirty years ago by George Wright, assisted 
greatly by Benjamin Day. As Joseph Pennell very 
justly said of mechanical reproductions of the pen 
drawings of Daniel Vierge, they give a better idea 
of the original work of the artist than the most 
skillful engraver could have done. An "interpre- 
tation" of a line drawing would be somewhat of an 
absurdity. 

Yet while the half-tone plate is a thing of mechan- 
ical beauty in itself, it inevitably flattens values. 
Over a drawing of extreme delicacy or of elusive 
quality it runs with the crushing effect of a steam 
roller. A rough, crude original fares better; its 
hard edges are softened. But a wood engraving at 
its best follows the mood and the method of the 
artist. The sensitive art of the engraver joins 
hands with the art of the draftsman. I wish that 
it were possible to give an adequate idea of the 
great debt all of us who drew pictures for publica- 
tion in the days when wood engraving was at its 
best owed to the skill of those artists of the graver. 



CHAPTER X 



AT the Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Mr. 
A\ John Foord, a representative of the state of 
New York at the Exposition, invited me one 
day to lunch with Thomas B. Reed and himself. 
I had made a good many cartoons in which Mr. 
Reed figured, but had never met him. We had a 
very pleasant luncheon party, and after it was over 
Mr. Reed and I walked down the steps together. 

During the luncheon he had never intimated in 
the slightest way that he had ever seen a picture 
of mine or had ever heard of me in his life; but 
just as we parted he looked at me with those half- 
closed eyes of his and said, in the long Yankee 
drawl habitual to him, "Mr. Rogers, when next 
you draw a caricature in which I appear, I wish 
you would send me a copy of it; I should like to see 
what your ideal of manly beauty is!" 

I afterward met Mr. Reed a great many times. 
Once when Congress had just assembled I was look- 
ing about for pictures on Capitol Hill; I called on 
the Speaker in his private office and made an attempt 
— in fact a number of them — to put the "tsar" on 
paper. 

No scintillating personality was ever so camou- 
flaged by nature as was that of Thomas B. Reed. 

168 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

The inside of that remarkable head and the outside 
of it bore no resemblance one to the other, except 
that a glimpse of the real man occasionally reached 
one in the flash or twinkle of his eyes. 

Perhaps it was through reliance upon this great 
mask that he took little pains in his manner to con- 
ceal his opinions of the people with whom he came 
in contact. A number of members of Congress 
came in to pay their respects to the Speaker while 
I was with him. To many he was frigidly polite; to 
a few icy; and to still fewer he was cordial and 
expansive. He had no time for the oratorical or 
for those who were swelled up with a sense of their 
own importance; and I think he enjoyed setting 
down a ruthless heel on a palavering, favor-currying 
soul. 

But a modest man, one who made no attempt o 
impress him, was his especial delight. To such a one 
he gave a warm welcome. My most distinct recollec- 
tion of any of the members of the House who came to 
see him that day is of Gen. Joe Wheeler. Physically 
a small man as he stood alongside of the Speaker, 
his manner was so simple and unassuming that it 
was almost impossible to imagine him as one of the 
most dashing cavalrymen of the Civil War. 

He seemed more like a quiet country gentleman 

who had never taken part in any of the turmoil of 

public affairs. To him Tom Reed paid all the respect 

due to a great national character. All the austerity 

of the Speaker melted away at sight of the little 

Southerner, and I had, for a moment or two, a 

glimpse behind the mask. 

160 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

An artist has sometimes a little advantage over 
a reporter in his contact with public men. A man 
like Reed, for instance, is cautious in what he says 
to a newspaper man unless he knows him intimately; 
but he will often express himself very frankly to a 
man who is sitting there making a sketch of him. 
After the lapse of years, now that Thomas B. Reed 
is a figure in history, it may be permissible to print 
a little story of his criticism of a portrait which John 
Sargent painted of him. 

In the anteroom of the Speaker's office hangs this 
portrait of Mr. Reed. It certainly is not one of Sar- 
gent's best. I have looked at Mr. Reed's face many 
times. To me it did not in any way resemble a 
yellow pumpkin, but that was what Sargent's por- 
trait always suggested, and Mr. Reed detested it. 
On that particular day I was trying to get a sketch 
of Mr. Reed, and I tried over and over without much 
success. His face was a mask out of which the 
man showed scarcely at all. My struggles evidently 
amused him. 

You seem to be having difficulties," he chuckled. 

I am," I replied. 

You are not the only one," he said. 
Then he got clean away from the subject and 
began a long account of all the things his enemies 
had said against him; of the accusations they had 
made, the names they had called him, and in his slow, 
drawling voice he strung this out for over half an 
hour. It was all interesting stuff, well worth listen- 
ing to. I wish I could remember it well enough to 

set it down here. Nevertheless, I wondered why he 

170 






A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

was repeating all these slanders (and occasional 
truths) against himself, when suddenly he wound 
up, as nearly as I can remember, as follows: 

"But no one, in Congress or out, disgruntled 
Republican or partisan Democrat — no, not even my 
most bitter enemy — has ever intimated that I looked 
like the picture John Sargent painted of me!" 

By all the laws of contrast Theodore Roosevelt 
should follow Thomas B. Reed in these pages. No 
two men in public life were so totally different. One 
with his dry, cynical wit, the other with the boy in 
him ever alive just under the skin — but everyone 
knows all this. 

Once during his term as Vice-President I visited 
Mr. Roosevelt at Oyster Bay. The family had not 
accompanied him to Washington that winter, and 
he had come up to his Long Island home for a little 
outing. It happened, when he served as police com- 
missioner in New York City, that I made some car- 
toons in Harper's Weekly which fell in line precisely 
with what he was trying to do. He had no use for 
a group of theoretical reformers who balked at his 
practical methods for the accomplishment of the 
very reforms they were continually talking about. 

This group went by the name, collectively, of the 
"Goo-Goos." It was a good name for a man in my 
line of business to have a little fun with, and I made 
some pictures of the innocent little "Goo-Goos," 
which I am afraid they failed to appreciate. But 
Mr. Roosevelt had saved them all, and he brought 
them out and commented on them. I have men- 
tioned these cartoons here because later on they 

171 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

come into the story. While we were talking, the 
younger Roosevelt boys were romping about the 
room. Quentin was a little chap and I remember I 
said something about its being easy to guess Mr. 
Roosevelt's choice in the Scott novels. The adven- 
tures of Quentin Durward in northern France could 
not fail in their appeal to the daring spirit of Theo- 
dore Roosevelt. 

As I look back now to that evening on Sagamore 
Hill, I can see how the name of Quentin Durward 
stirred the imagination of Mr. Roosevelt. His 
memory was extraordinary, as many who knew him 
will testify ; and he knew the story, both the adven- 
turous and the political sides of it, down to the last 
detail. The romantic origin of Quentin Roosevelt's 
name must ever be associated with that brave lad's 
death. 

Over the forests and plains of northern France — 
where Walter Scott in fancy led gallant Quentin 
Durward — young Quentin Roosevelt circled like an 
eagle, and to him fell adventures as daring, yet far 
more wonderful. Perhaps the valiant soul of young 
Quentin owed something to the idealism of his name, 
and the spark of fire that the old romancer struck 
blazed out again, gloriously, in his brief career. 

At the beginning of Mr. Roosevelt's public life, 
as I have said, I found myself in the ranks fighting 
the same foes; and it was my privilege in the last 
great battle of his life, the battle for a place in the 
ranks of the civilized nations who were fighting our 
battles, again to follow his banner. 

There was, however, a time when I could not 

172 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

follow him. A third term as President of the United 
States has always seemed to me to be dangerous 
for the occupant of the office and for the country 
as well. A man who has held that exalted office for 
eight years, with the prospect of four more years of 
power, might easily come to the conclusion that he 
was indispensable, and the people might easily fall 
into a slumbrous state and forget their part in a 
government which is of and by and for them. 

During the campaigns in which Theodore Roose- 
velt ran for a third term I fought on the other side; 
but when the Great War came on, it was with joy 
that I found myself once more in harmony with his 
purposes. In a series of cartoons in the New York 
Herald I had the satisfaction of supporting him in 
his efforts to arouse the country to a sense of its 
duty to the Allies in their desperate need. 

In recognition of the help I had given to him he 
paid me the honor of a call at the Herald office. In his 
generous heart remained no thought of old antago- 
nisms. The first thing he spoke of was our troubles 
in the days when he was a police commissioner, with 
the "Goo-Goos." 

"And do you realize that in your cartoons attack- 
ing the pacifists you are fighting the lineal descend- 
ants of those selfsame slackers?" he asked. "The 
'Goo-Goos* wanted certain reforms, but were un- 
willing to take the only practical means available to 
bring them about. The pacifists say they have a 
"passion for peace,' but they refuse to fight for it." 

Theodore Roosevelt had another engagement at 
the Herald Building that day. The blind news vendor 

173 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

who sells papers just outside the door had confided 
to Mr. Nat Jennings, an old and tried friend of 
Colonel Roosevelt's who always covered Oyster Bay 
for the Herald, that the ambition of his life was to 
shake the hand of Theodore Roosevelt- Jennings 
had only to ask the colonel in order to obtain a 
hearty consent to gratify the blind man's desire. 
I witnessed the meeting, and it was a fine man-to- 
man affair, no mere formal handshake, but a charm- 
ing, friendly talk which must have sent a penetrating 
ray of real sunshine into a darkened life. It was in 
little acts of this kind that Roosevelt made friends 
even among those who disagreed with him — the 
human touch which put life into all his contacts 
with men. 

Not so very manv months before Colonel Roose- 
velt's death I sent him a book of mv cartoons which 
had been selected from those published in the 
Herald during the war; and on the flyleaf I wrote a 
little inscription which ran something like this: 
"To Theodore Roosevelt, whose words, 'Let us pay 
with our bodies for our souls' desire,' furnished the 
spark which fired the heart of the Nation." A few 
days afterward I received from him the following 
letter: 

METROPOLITAN 
482 Fourth Avenue, New York 

Office of Odob* t5, 1917. 

Theodore Roosevelt. 

Mt dear Mr. Rogers: 

If I were allowed to choose my own epitaph, and if I felt thai 
I deserved what you said, I should ask to have what you have 

174 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

inscribed in the volume you sent me, used as such epitaph. 
Believe me, my dear fellow, I am very proud of it. As for the 
pictures themselves, they have been from the time you started 
them, among the not too many things which have kept up my 
pride in my country. At a time when almost every cartoonist 
or writer was nervously endeavoring to seem to attack brutality 
without hurting the feelings of the brute, and was therefore de- 
nouncing war with a vagueness which made the denunciation 
apply as much to Belgium as Germany, you served the cause of 
decency by striking fearlessly home at the offender. It was a 
great and manly service, and all Americans owe you a debt of 
gratitude. 

Faithfully yours, 



Theodore Roosevelt. 



Mb. W. A. Rogers, 
New York Herald, 
New York. 



A tremendous effort has been made from time to 
time to discredit Theodore Roosevelt because he put 
through the Panama Canal in what they call a high- 
handed way. But nobody will deny now that an 
interocean canal was bound to be built. The world's 
commerce wasn't going to halt at a little strip of 
land the breadth of one's finger on the map. 

If we hadn't built it, and built it then, it is only 
a fair question to ask who should we have liked to 
see undertake the task in our place? Theodore 
Roosevelt, when he stuck his spade into the earth 
of the Isthmus, had a wider world vision than any 
American of that day. He knew it was then or 
never as a wholly American enterprise, and if he 
heaved a little mud and a few rocks over the moun- 

175 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

tains into Bogota in the operation, that was unfortu- 
nate but necessary. 

It does not make a particle of difference whether 
one was always able to follow Mr. Roosevelt with 
approval in his many-sided career or not; admira- 
tion for that great life as a whole has been so glori- 
ously earned that each one of us must needs pay our 
little tribute to his memory. Fortunately, he has 
left us such intimate glimpses of his inner life, his 
thinking has been so open for all to see, whether 
about kings or flapjacks, that, although numbered 
with the great dead, he yet seems to live. Roosevelt 
may be said to have worn, not his heart, but his 
faults, on his sleeve. His personal prejudices were 
all public; what vanities he had, what injustices he 
practiced, what overriding of a strict interpretation 
of the law, what quarrels he indulged in — all these 
facts and many more were worn where all men could 
see them just as plainly and prominently as his 
great qualities of courage and generosity and patri- 
otism and farseeing statesmanship. Where another 
man is ashamed of and tries to hide his shortcomings, 
Roosevelt may be said almost to have paraded 
them, not consciously, but because he was a natural 
man of an almost primitive type. Good and bad 
he was, but never indifferent. He constantly bat- 
tled for what he thought was the right, and picked 
up whatever weapon came to his hand to help his 
cause along. 

He had an honest ruthlessness in attaining his 
ends which shows gloriously on the side of achieve- 
ment, but, unlike most statesmen, he had no shame 

176 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

in turning the medal over and showing to all men the 
obverse side. One quality alone he exhibited to 
which I never could reconcile myself — that of a 
study of wild-animal life through post-mortems. 
His expedition in Africa for scientific purposes 
seemed to me an orgy of blood. I learned more in 
ten minutes about wild animals in Africa while 
looking at a cinema picture of a water-hole, taken 
by Paul Rainey, than could be gleaned from all those 
great volumes of records of elephants', rhinoceroses', 
and lions' death throes ad nauseam. But I put that 
down to the side of Roosevelt's faults; and even 
there perhaps other minds may not feel the same 
as I do toward the right of the wild creatures of the 
forest to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." 
Where Theodore Roosevelt shone out in his truest 
greatness was in the late war. Baffled in his desire 
to go to the front himself, he sent the boys who were 
his pride and comfort, who were his comrades from 
their early boyhood, to take his place. How well 
they represented him is known by all men. A great 
man is like a great mountain. When I first saw 
Pikes Peak the foothills looked enormous. Over 
the tops of them appeared a little hummock against 
the western sky. That was the mountain itself. 
One day I started across the plain on horseback. 
As we traveled eastward all day long the foothills 
appeared to flatten out, but the Peak kept rising 
higher and higher above them, until, at thirty 
miles' distance against the western sun it stood out 
in all its solitary grandeur. Surely in his battle for 
eternal right the soul of Theodore Roosevelt towered 

177 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

above those faults which linked him only the more 
closely to his fellow-men. 

The woman in the Bible who changed into a pillar 
of salt met a fate but slightly different from that 
of a great many elderly people. The average per- 
son, as he grows older, changes into a pillar of chalk 
if he doesn't watch out. The alert mind of "Uncle 
Joe " Cannon saved him from this fate. His intensely 
human interest in everything and everybody kept 
his being fluid. At eighty-six he looked out upon 
his life and found it pretty nearly as good as new. 

I spent a Sunday morning with him not many 
years ago. He was even then what many would 
call an aged man; but no chalk had clogged his 
veins and his mind was as quick and active as that 
of a man of forty. He did not ignore facts in order 
to retain his youthful spirit, but spoke frankly of his 
many years, and he talked of death. 

We were all seated in a room in his house in 

Washington, which had several large windows 

opening, I think, to the south. "Uncle Joe" looked 

up at one of the large windows, kept his gaze there 

as though he saw some presence outside, and said: 

"I am getting on in years and I have seen many of 

my friends leave this fine world. My mind doesn't 

dwell on the uncertainty of life; I enjoy living, I am 

interested in all that makes it worth while; but if I 

saw an old, muffled figure out through that window 

and it pointed its long bony finger at me and said, 

'Come!' I should be ready to obey." 

That always seemed to me a fine spirit for an old 

178 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

man — to enjoy the sunshine, endure the shadow, and 
be ready for his exit. I had often watched "Uncle 
Joe" at work in the House and was impressed with 
his wonderful activity. He made most of the other 
Congressmen look as though they were asleep — and 
some of them generally were. 

I suppose "Uncle Joe's" opponents in Congress 
could come close to proving that he had committed 
every crime on the calendar of politics, but even 
they would have to admit that it is impossible to 
help liking a man so intensely alive. 

Speaking of age and a vigorous mind recalls a 
grand old American of the native stock with whom 
I once spent a few pleasant and profitable days. 
One time just after the end of a fierce political 
campaign I shipped my canoe from New York Bay 
down to Virginia. A railroad strike held it up and I 
was marooned in a little inn near some mineral 
springs for a number of days. An old Indian — he 
must have been eighty at least — was stopping there, 
taking the waters for his rheumatism. He was a 
very tall, sturdy old man, exceedingly well edu- 
cated. I spent a good deal of my time with him. 

His history, as he recounted it to me, was a pecul- 
iar one. When he was a tiny child there was a great 
fight, in which his father took part, between the 
Seminoles and the whites. He became separated 
from his people, and after they had been driven 
away he was found by an army officer who later 
went into the United States navy. This officer 
adopted him — whether legally or not I have for- 
gotten, but at any rate brought him up — and he 

179 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

spent his boyhood aboard various naval vessels and 
received his education from the officers. 

Much of his life after he grew up was spent as a 
missionary, both spiritual and medical, among 
various tribes of Indians. The springs where he 
was taking the waters had been known to his people 
from time immemorial and they had made long 
journeys in former times to this very place before 
the advent of the white race. 

The old Indian and I used often to sit for hours 
under the oak trees and discuss the different view- 
points of the white man and the Indian. His educa- 
tion had been much more complete than my own, 
and he had behind him an experience of life all over 
the world, civilized and savage. My part in the 
discussions consisted largely in drawing him out 
with questions. Often he would sit for half an hour 
without saying a word, looking back into the great 
storehouse of his memories, but impenetrable. 
Then he would come out with a few pithy words. 

He told me it was but seldom he came in contact 
with a white man to whom he could talk seriously. 
As a rule they carried, back in their minds, the idea 
that he, being Indian-born, must be essentially irre- 
sponsible, not quite on their mental plane. When 
he saw that I appreciated his highly cultivated mind 
the old fellow gave me the full benefit of his thoughts. 

In the last conversation we had together he epito- 
mized the whole discussion of the difference between 
the white race and the Indian, and this is how he 
put it: 

"Do you know what is the difference between the 

180 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

white man and the Indian? It is this: The white 
man seeks to multiply his desires — the Indian to 
satisfy his wants." 

Nowhere in all the great libraries of the land can 
so big a thought be found expressed in so few words 
— so just and complete an arraignment of our entire 
philosophy of life and the civilization which it has 
produced. Time and again I have repeated those 
words over to myself, and over and over have I 
seen the inescapable proof of their truth. 

Another Indian of high intellectual attainments is 
Doctor Eastman. On one or two occasions I have 
talked with him about his people. Doctor Eastman 
was born on the Northern plains. His parents were 
pure-blooded Sioux, one of the finest races of all the 
Indian peoples. 

While Doctor Eastman values the knowledge of 
the white man strongly, he yet believes that the In- 
dian knows much more than the white man gives him 
credit for. He points out that he also has a mind 
which is educated, but along different lines — an edu- 
cation which the white man's detachment from 
nature causes him to underrate, if, indeed, he can 
comprehend it at all. 

He told me of an incident which occurred at a 

time when the people in Washington wanted to 

impress the principal men of one of the tribes with 

the power of the government. They arranged to 

have several of the older men from this tribe make a 

trip to Washington, where they were to be shown 

all the great buildings which would contrast so 

forcibly with the frail tepees in which they lived. 

181 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

These old men, Doctor Eastman said, were from 
a mountain country and were used to the sight of 
the towering and eternal hills. They arrived in 
Washington and their guide led them to the foot of 
Capitol Hill. "There," he said, pointing to the 
dome of the Capitol, "is the work of the white man. 
What do you think of that?" The old Indians looked 
at the dome for a moment or two, then one turned 
to the other, snapped his fingers, blew out his breath, 
and said, "A bubblel" 

Doctor Eastman then expressed a thought which 
was quite in keeping with what the old Seminole 
had said years before. "The Indian," said he, "looks 
on much of the civilization of the white man as 
a silly multiplication of material troubles." I am 
never so much impressed with the truth of this 
observation as on October 1st, when we discover on 
moving day how much trouble we have spent years 
in accumulating. 



CHAPTER Xn 

I HAVE already told the story of a " runaway 
assignment" and of how it turned out. That 
expedition took place in 1878. In the year 1879 
came the great boom in Leadville. Mr. A. A. Hayes 
and I went to Colorado in July of that year for the 
Harpers. Mr. Hayes was to write a series of maga- 
zine articles, and my part was to make pictures. 

Fifteen years later I rolled into Leadville in a 
Pullman car; but in 1879 our entry was quite dif- 
ferent. A little narrow-gauge road ended at Fair- 
play, and from there we proceeded to cross the 
Mosquito Range in a stage drawn by six mules. I 
sat with the driver, a fine-fibered, sturdy type only 
to be found in the mountains. When I got aboard 
he was cursing the freight driver, who had taken his 
wheel mules and left him a pair of green animals 
that had never been over the pass; and good cause 
he had to use "language," as I soon discovered. 
The road over the Mosquito Range was just the 
width of the stage, with perhaps a foot to spare. 
For two teams to pass going in opposite directions 
one or the other had to get into a cut-out — if there 
was one. The road was also plentifully supplied with 
"'cute curves" as it zigzagged up the side of the 
mountain. 

188 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Once we saw on the stretch directly above us an 
ore wagon, with a four-horse team, coining down. 
The driver was drunk, singing and cracking his 
blacksnake whip. Our driver shouted to him to get 
into the cut-out. 

"Plenty of room to pass," the answer came back. 

Quick as a flash, out came a gun half as long as 
my arm from under the seat. Our driver yelled, 
"Git inter that cut-out!" and took a sure aim at 
the drunken man. "All ri'!" came the reply, and 
when we passed the ore wagon salutations were 
exchanged— "Hello, Hank!" "Hello, Jim!"— and 
the ore wagon pulled out into the road, the driver 
renewing his song and cracking his blacksnake 
whip. 

Up near the top a wagon containing a huge box 
was stranded alongside the road. One of the horses 
had broken a leg on the rocks and the owner of the 
box was waiting for the driver to return with another 
animal. 

As we rested our team we learned that the box 
contained a grand piano. "Yes," said its owner, 
"I made a strike an' I'm buildin' a house in Lead- 
ville. It's all done 'ceptin' the roof. Couldn't get no 
shingle boards 'n' I told the missus I was goin' ter 
git her the best pianner in Denver. It's in that box 
an' it cost fifteen hundred dollars in Denver, a dead 
horse on Muskeeter Pass, and God knows how much 
more 'fore I get it home." 

The happy owner of a house without a roof and 

of a grand piano stranded on the side of a mountain 

waved us a cheerful good-by as we passed along. 

184 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

When we reached the top of the mountain the 
two leaders were taken off and we started down the 
other side with four mules. We had brakes and a 
metal shoe about two feet long in which the rear 
right wheel rested. This shoe was shaped like a sled- 
runner, with a groove in which the wheel set, and was 
attached by a chain to the forward end of the stage 
body. 

But even with this drag the mules were unable 
to hold back the stage on the steeper runs, and many 
times we plunged down the mountainside and around 
those "'cute curves" at a breakneck pace. Here 
the green wheel mules constantly hugged the cliff- 
side, but when we came out on the edge of a great 
rock, where one could look down for a thousand feet 
or so, they would shy to the other side in a most 
dangerous fashion. The last hour of our journey 
down the mountain was made in the pitch dark, 
and we arrived at the Palace Hotel at about nine 
o'clock. 

A match touched to the windward side of this 

structure would have caused it to disappear in about 

fifteen or twenty minutes, as it was simply a light 

wooden frame covered with builder's paper. The 

bedroom floors were formed of slats two or three 

inches apart — and the ceilings of brown paper. 

However, the dining room, which at the moment 

interested us most, had its tables already set for 

breakfast, and we sat down before a clean cloth, 

which looked encouraging. Beside each plate there 

lay what I took to be a very neat menu card, but I 

noticed that it was deeply bordered with black. 

185 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

The "menu," which was intended for the break- 
fast guests, read as follows: 

You are respectfully invited to attend the funeral of Nip 
Guerin, late cook of this hotel, at 10 a.m. He was shot by Deputy 
Sheriff So-and-so while defending his claim to a mine prospect 
he had grubstaked. 

Palace Hotel. 

We had had a strenuous day and when I trod the 
slats of my bedroom it took but a little time to roll 
into bed. 

About midnight I awoke suddenly; a violent 
quarrel was proceeding in the big gambling hall below 
me. Only a thin film of paper and a few slats sepa- 
rated me from the voices that alternated in angry 
tones. One party to the controversy had loaned the 
other some fifteen hundred dollars to send to St. 
Louis for material to start an enterprise in Lead- 
ville, the details of which I decline to go into, and 
the professional person who carried the money to 
St. Louis had failed to return. 

I knew the turn that quarrels in a boom town 
usually take, but I was dreadfully tired and sleepy. 
Everyone has heard that a feather bed will turn a 
bullet. I wondered if a piece of paper, the chance of 
a slat, and two inches of straw mattress would be as 
effective. Then I went to sleep and awoke in this 
world the next morning in time to attend the funeral 
of Nip, who died in the defense of his property. 

After the funeral Hayes and I rode over to the 
Little Pittsburg Mine. There we met a distinguished 
party of mining men headed by John W. Mackay, 

186 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

who had come on from San Francisco to take a look 
at the Leadville properties, which, I think, were 
then in the market. We all donned "slickers" and 
boots, and a few of us at a time were lowered down a 
shaft in what looked like a large dry-goods box. 
Hayes always wore a white high hat with a broad 
black band, and I remember it made rather an odd 
combination with the rest of his outfit. The walls 
of the shaft were very rough and our dry-goods box 
bumped against the sides as we made our crazy way 
at a great rate of speed down the six hundred feet 
toward the bottom. About halfway down we sud- 
denly came to a halt, stuck fast between two pro- 
jecting rocks. We could distinctly hear the rope 
coiling up on top of our box, and it was an exceed- 
ingly disquieting sound when we considered the 
three hundred or more feet of space between us and 
the bottom of the shaft. Up aloft, however, the 
engineer quickly realized that his rope was running 
free, and in a moment, with a heartbreaking jerk, 
we were drawn up a hundred feet or more and then 
let down again at sickening speed, and this time we 
bumped our way safely to the floor of the mine. 

Mr. Mackay and his friends poked their walking 
sticks into walls of what looked to me like brown 
sugar, and after wandering about in that dismal 
place for a while we took our places in the dry-goods 
box and returned to the surface. 

Evidently Mr. Mackay hadn't a sweet tooth, for 
the "brown sugar " failed to impress him. Mr. 
Hayes and I, having visited the cemetery and the 
Little Pittsburg Mine for the sake of Harper's Maga- 

187 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

zine, made a little pilgrimage on our own account 
to a long, low cottage that stood on a rising ground 
in the outskirts of the town. This was the home of 
Mary Hal lock Foote, who for many years followed 
the fortunes of her engineer husband, Mr. Arthur 
Foote, in the mining camps of the Rockies and 
Sierras. If Mrs. Foote were not so identified with 
her work as a novelist she would be better known as 
one of the most accomplished illustrators in America. 
There is a charm about her black-and-white drawing 
which cannot be described, but it may be accounted 
for by the fact that, more than any other American 
illustrator, she lived the pictures from day to day 
which she drew so sympathetically. 

Somehow she and Owen Wister, two products of 
the most refined culture of the East, got closer to the 
rough frontier character than any writers I know, 
and Mrs. Foote supplemented this with pictures 
that one feels were made while looking from the 
rim of some deep cation or by the light of a lantern 
in a lonesome cabin. Hayes and I realized that it 
would be good, indeed, in this wild camp of boomers 
to pay our respects to a woman so doubly accom- 
plished, and we were greatly disappointed when we 
reined up at her door to find her cottage closed and 
its windows barricaded. We were relieved after- 
ward to learn that this ominous appearance of 
things meant simply that Mrs. Foote was away on a 
two- weeks' prospecting trip with her miner husband. 

I had a rather odd adventure in another part of 
Colorado that summer which taught me the futility 
of a tenderfoot carrying a gun. The Denver & Rio 

188 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Grande Railroad then ran from Denver to Pueblo 
and thence to some point a little south of there. 
The Kansas Pacific and thfc Union Pacific were both 
trying to get control of it. Court decisions threw 
it into the hands of the Kansas Pacific and out 
again three or four times during the summer of 1879. 

When the Kansas Pacific took it several hundred 
employees of the Denver & Rio Grande were thrown 
out of work and as many K. P. men when the D. & 
R. G. took hold; and so it seesawed, much to the 
inconvenience of peaceable passengers who were 
constantly the innocent bystanders in rows between 
the rival trainmen. 

On a day when I arrived in Pueblo the Denver & 
Rio Grande faction had just been thrown out. We 
passengers were quietly eating our lunch in the 
station dining room when the waiters suddenly 
rushed to the doors, slammed them shut, and barri- 
caded them with tables and chairs. An elderly lady 
opposite me rose in alarm, but her husband, an old 
mining man, bade her sit down again. He calmly 
helped himself to another piece of pumpkin pie. 

"Set still," he said, "I never see a first-class fight 
in this town yet." 

Just at that moment I heard the bark of a gun 
right under our window. I looked out and saw a man 
huddled up close to the building, gun in hand. He 
had a bad cut across his forehead from which the 
blood was flowing. Across the platform a group of 
men were cutting open a bundle of ax helves, and 
with these weapons they held as pretty a shindy as 
ever was carried on in the green island across the 

189 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

sea. Very soon a posse, with the Pueblo sheriff at 
its head 9 appeared on the scene, lined everybody up 
against the station wall, including the male pas- 
sengers (the old miner had finished his pie, mean- 
while), and took away every weapon found. My 
revolver was at that time in my gripsack, so escaped. 

The next day I stood on the station platform, 
waiting for the train to Colorado Springs. My job 
was to make pictures. I had a little sketchbook out 
and was busily engaged drawing an old prospector 
when the train pulled in. All at once a big, rough 
fellow snatched my sketchbook out of my hand and 
shouted : 

"Here, boys, here's that d d reporter that is 

knockin* us in the Denver papers. Git him!" 

I started after the fellow to get back my book, 
but he shook me off, waving the evidence of my 
crime in the air and calling to a group of perhaps 
fifty men at the far end of the station platform to 
"come on. Here he is!" 

An old man slipped up beside me and grabbed me 
by the arm. "Young fellow, take my advice and 
get into that train!" 

But he's got my sketchbook," I said, hotly. 
Never mind your book, boy; those fellows are 
sore. They got licked yesterday. Some of 'em's 
drunk and armed and they'll make quick work of 
you if you ain't careful. Now do as I tell you — get 
into the train, set down in the middle of the coach, 
and set still. Don't say a word to no one." 

He was in dead earnest and probably knew better 
than I, and so, much against my will, I took his 

190 



« 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

advice. Pretty soon the gang appeared, peering 
into the coaches, but, as only one of them knew what 
I looked like, the ruse of my aged adviser worked. 
The train pulled out for Colorado Springs and I 
was safe. 

But two days later I felt sore over the sketch- 
book and I felt rather flat to think that I hadn't 
made more of a fight for it. I had made an appoint- 
ment to meet a ranch owner at a little hotel (that 
sounds better than saloon) near the station in 
Pueblo that day, and was to accompany him to his 
ranch on the Huerfano River. So I went to the gun 
shop in Colorado Springs and bought a box of 
cartridges. The shopkeeper also loaded my revolver 
at the same time. 

I got aboard the train for Pueblo, feeling like a real 
man. On the way down I was introduced to a young 
lady who was to meet her brother-in-law at Pueblo. 
He had built a new house down on the Huerfano 
and she was on her way to visit her sister. 

When we arrived at Pueblo I assisted my new 
acquaintance, whose brother-in-law failed to appear, 
to the hotel bus, and in doing so passed a line-up 
of about as sulky a looking gang as it was ever my 
luck to encounter. At the end of the line was the 
man who had stolen my sketchbook. I knew I was 
safe, according to all the unwritten laws of the 
West, while I was escorting the young woman; but 
I also knew that the return to the station was an 
entirely different matter. 

When I reached the gang on the return they all 
looked at me very hard, but no one stirred until I 

191 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 



"What is your business with me? You want to 
speak mighty quick!" 

Thereupon my pursuer replied that the superin- 
tendent of the railroad had wired him from Colorado 
Springs that I was all right; so he had followed me 
to apologize for taking my book, which he had sent 
on to the superintendent. He didn't like to back 
water before all the boys, so he was following me 
over to the saloon where we could have a drink 
together. And that we did in company with the 
ranch owner and ex-Governor Boise, who by chance 
was thirsty that morning. There is a curious sequel 
to this story, which must wait until I recount what 
happened to my young lady and the old ranchman 
and myself. 

My ranchman was too gallant an old fellow to 
leave a lady in distress, so we drove over to the 
South Pueblo Hotel, where he offered his services. 
She did not know where her brother-in-law's ranch 
was located except that it was in the Huerfano 
Valley, and the ranchman only knew that it was 
somewhere outside of his eighty-thousand-acre tract. 
The lady thought it was about twenty-five or thirty 
miles from the railroad. With these vague clews to 
go by we loaded up our passenger's trunks and 
started off. 

Keeping the twin Spanish Peaks off our starboard 
bow, we steered a fairly straight course for the Huer- 
fano River. Twilight came while we were still 
wandering through the wilderness. Not a sign of a 
house had we seen all afternoon — and a house in 
that country usually shows up for an immense dis- 

198 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

tance. Brother-in-law had just completed a new 
brick house of which he was very proud, so our 
young lady told us. 

It grew dark. There was no moon, but the stars 
in that country shone out with a glorious brilliancy. 
Suddenly the old ranchman, whose eyes were better 
trained than ours, called out: "The house! The 
house!" There it loomed up, as we neared it, a 
black silhouette against the sky, but not a light 
visible. We approached closer and closer — not a 
single sign of life anywhere. And when we drew up 
within a few feet we saw there were no windows, 
only openings, and no doors! 

For a moment we sat horror-stricken. 

"Great God! a fire!" the old ranchman groaned. 
The young lady gasped. I jumped down and ran to 
the open doorway. The house was filled two feet 
deep with mud. 

"Not a fire, but a flood," I called. Then we drove 
around the house, where could be seen a glimpse of 
the river. A clump of trees crowned a rising ground 
on our right a quarter of a mile away, and there we 
saw a dim light. We raced our tired horses toward 
it, and from a little A tent appeared poor brother- 
in-law. A terrible flood three days before had swept 
through the new house, which had been built on 
ground high enough to have been considered safe. 
It had carried out the windows and most of the fur- 
niture; all they had left was the tent and a small 
supply of food which he had managed to carry from 
the house. Our young lady sprang out of the wagon 

and into the little tent to her sister, and, although 

194 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the old ranchman tried to persuade the little family 
to go with us to his house, they would not think of 
abandoning their own place. The plucky little 
woman we had brought to this forlorn wreck of a 
home had us dump her trunks out under the cotton- 
wood trees. As we reluctantly left them she smil- 
ingly made us a grand, sweeping bow and disap- 
peared into the tiny tent. 

We left brother-in-law a good share of the pro- 
visions which the old ranchman had bought in 
Pueblo, and drove down the valley in search of the 
ranch house. To avoid the endless bends of the 
river we soon made our way out on to the plains. 
On three sides of us, miles away, rose the mountains, 
some of them snow-capped, all mysterious, ghostly; 
and above us was spread such a starry host as can 
only be seen in that clear sky. 

Far away through the gloom we could make out a 
great flock of sheep, some of the animals standing, 
others lying down. A solitary shepherd stood beside 
his flock. We drew nearer; not a sheep moved. 
We drove between two great groups and directly 
past the shepherd. He had a sort of white hood 
which covered his head, a sheepskin coat, and a 
staff on which he leaned. We passed within a rod 
of him. He made neither a move nor a sound. 
Had he and all his thousand sheep been carved out 
of marble they could not have looked, under the 
flickering stars, more like a company of silent 
ghosts. 

As we passed by the shepherd the old ranchman 
grasped my arm with a grip like iron. "Great God! 

105 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

What are they?" he said. I do not understand to 
this day how it was that the passage of our wagon 
went so completely unnoticed. 

The old man was really shaken; strange things 
happen in the mountains and on the deep ocean 
that cannot be explained in a steam-heated flat. 
Toward morning we reached the ranch house, which 
was what remained of an ancient Spanish mansion, 
with cowboy additions. The next afternoon came 
the sequel to my little near-homicide story, illus- 
trating the futility of a tenderfoot toting a gun. 
Several of the cowboys were out in a ruined part of 
the old Spanish house and had put up a target against 
the thick walls of masonry. They were all shooting 
away at it, and as one or two of them were indiffer- 
ent shots I felt myself quite a good enough marksman 
to compete with them. I stood up with my "bull- 
dog" .88, aimed, and pulled the trigger. The gun 
missed fire. I felt a cold sweat ooze out on my fore- 
head as I reflected what that might have meant the 
morning before. I examined the cartridge which 
had been placed in my revolver by the Colorado 
Springs gunsmith. My revolver was of the "rim 
fire" variety, the cartridge "center fire." I returned 
to the house and buried that gun down in the bottom 
of my gripsack, never to be carried again. 

The gentlemen who sell tires, not to speak of 
chewing gum and other necessities of modern life, 
seem to live in deadly fear that the public will forget 
such things exist. Doubtless it is a good thing to 
remind a man at every turn of the road while he is 

196 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

wearing out a pair of old tires that soon he will need 
new ones. But perhaps there may be too much of a 
good thing. At any rate, artists, as a rule, think 
nature unadorned (by billboards) would be adorned 
the most. 

In a wild Western state many years ago billboard 
advertising on a gigantic scale was dealt a lethal 
blow by one lone artist. I hope this account of what 
happened in Colorado in 1879, the year of the great 
Leadville boom, may give new courage to Mr. Joseph 
Pennell ; for no matter how hopeless his self-imposed 
task of ridding our landscapes of billboards may 
seem, he can hark back to this as a precedent of 
victory. 

Tom Parrish of Colorado Springs was an etcher, 
and a very good one. He was also interested in 
mining properties. Both these lines of endeavor took 
him about in the mountains, and he was greatly 
distressed when he saw advertising signs, with letters 
ten and twenty feet high, painted on the great cliffs 
which formed the mountainsides of that wonderful 
region. 

Tom Parrish was a mining man by force of circum- 
stances, but he was an artist by nature. Artists, 
public opinion to the contrary notwithstanding, are 
practical people. They deal with the visible world, 
and the visible world in Colorado was being ruined 
by a lot of vandals. 

Tom Parrish was a popular man in Colorado 
Springs. He got himself nominated for state senator 
and won the election. Then he prepared a bill mak- 
ing it an offense punishable by a fine of one thou- 

107 



A WORLD WORTH WtilLE 

was transferred to Dick, and Dick's opinion was 
asked (and given) before another topic was intro- 
duced. Toward sunset we wandered up to the 
hilltop and sat down on the rocks — we three. 

"This is the Wet Mountain Valley down below 
us — yes, it is, Dick — and yonder are the three great 
peaks of the Sangre de Cristo Range, the Trois 
Tetons. 

"Yes, Dick, we know them, and when the sun 
sinks down behind them every night we watch their 
shadows travel down the valley. 

"Yes, Dick, we keep very quiet while the shadows 
creep down and the wind steals around us in the 
grass; and then sometimes we feel a little lonesome, 
Dick. Yes, sir, it's over a hundred miles down to the 
Spanish Peaks; the shadows travel all the way down 
the valley to meet them, Dick, and when they fill 
the valley we go home to our little house in Hungry 
Gulch. 

"That's our home; we're used to it; we can't 
leave it. Can we, Dick?" 

And soon the glorious sunset was over, the shadows 
traveled down the valley until they met the Spanish 
Peaks; they filled the valley; a cold wind sprang 
up. I, too, felt a little lonely. 

I parted with my friend and Dick at the door of 
their home, under the shriveled sunflower. 

"Good night, sir. Keep to the right at the big 
pine and watch out for the "slipping rocks' beyond. 
Yes, Dick, you're liable to fall into the gulch off the 
slipping rocks." 



CHAPTER Xm 

I WAS fortunate enough to be assigned to accom- 
pany President Cleveland on his great tour over 
the country during his first term of office, when 
the hospitality of a whole nation was lavished on 
the stalwart President and his beautiful young wife. 
On this trip Mrs. Cleveland was assured a hundred 
times of a unanimous election if she were running 
for President. I am sure she will pardon, after 
this lapse of years, a little inside history — even a 
little joke on herself and the President connected 
with this journey. But let me preface it by telling 
a joke on myself. 

We had swung around half of the circle — Indian- 
apolis, Chicago, St. Paul, and St. Louis — and had 
finally reached Memphis, where we were literally 
overwhelmed with Southern hospitality. They 
simply could not do enough for us, and the veriest 
stranger one met on the street insisted on offering 
something in the way of entertainment. Just before 
time for our train to leave town I was called upon, 
at my hotel, by a gentleman who said he was com- 
missioned by the Semmes Brothers to present the 
three members of the press accompanying the Presi- 
dent, with three bottles of very old whisky, "Made 
in Maryland by their grandfather before the war, 

201 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

tween the chairs was a little round stand, shining 
with fresh varnish, and on the stand a figured-glass 
vase in which stood a few flowers. While the engine 
was being changed the first citizen of the village 
approached the train and invited the President and 
Mrs. Cleveland to alight and enjoy the hospitality 
of the hamlet. 

I am not sure the President, if by himself, would 
have come down to sit in that red-plush chair; but 
Mrs. Cleveland never hesitated a moment, and of 
course he had to follow. By no sign could it be dis- 
covered that she considered the spectacle of two 
people sitting out in the glaring sun on red-plush 
chairs as anything out of the ordinary. The train 
backed and switched about in the aimless way of 
railway trains, and we on board obtained occasional 
glimpses of a very serious-looking gentleman and a 
beautiful, smiling lady enthroned in red plush and 
being stared at by a circle of bashful mountain peo- 
ple who apparently could not get up courage to 
approach and speak to them. 

Presently we pulled merrily away and went on, 
through a deep cut and down a steep grade, until 
one of the correspondents approached the conductor 
and inquired when we were going back after the 
President. 

"Great jumping Scott, sir!" exclaimed that offi- 
cial. "Isn't he aboard?" 

Not until the bottom of the grade was reached 

did the train come to a stop, and then the miserable 

little engine could not back it up again until we ran 

out a mile farther and got a good start. 

204 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

An hour later, when we once more ran alongside 
the platform, the President was mopping his brow 
wearily. Mrs. Cleveland, however, had by that time 
captured every vote in the county. 

It has always been a puzzle to me how Grover 
Cleveland ever got into politics. His characteristics 
were about as far removed from those of the average 
politician as are the poles one from the other. To 
be "all things to all men" was to him unthinkable. 
To put on a smile when his thought called for a 
frown never seemed to occur to him. To refrain 
from an action because it was not the opportune 
moment politically was never Grover Cleveland's 
way if his duty, as he saw it, demanded action. 

And yet he realized his own limitations, knew that 
diplomacy had its legitimate place in politics and 
statesmanship, and while President was generally 
willing to listen to the astute counsels of "Dan" 
Lamont and, I make bold to say, the gentler but no 
less wise counsels of his young wife. The "swing 
around the circle" on which I accompanied him was 
made at a time when he was about to run as a can- 
didate for a second term. He was unpopular with 
the politicians of his own party at that time and 
had no very strong following among the people. 
In the northern half of our circling swing we traveled, 
for the most part, through hostile country. An in- 
gratiating attitude, flattering phrases, and all the 
familiar tricks of a politician looking for popular 
favor were in order if Mr. Cleveland was to follow 
the regular political formula. But he would have 
none of it. 

£05 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

stop and eat all the leaves within reach and Mr. 
Jefferson would quietly await his pleasure. 

I spent the next twenty-four hours at Buzzards 
Bay. We sat up far into the night and were up 
early the next morning. 

It would be hard to match that day with Joe 
Jefferson. His active mind had explored many 
paths; his travels had taken him to many lands; 
his life had been one of varying fortunes. He talked 
about everything under the sun and illuminated 
every topic. It seemed to me that he opened up 
a treasure house that day and bade me help myself. 
If my back had been broader I might have carried 
away a king's ransom. 

As it is, I can return to that day with Jefferson 
and trace from it a new inspiration and under- 
standing of art and life. Anyone who has read Mr. 
Jefferson's autobiography knows how delightfully 
humor and wisdom are mingled in all his thoughts. 
Add to that the energetic manner of speech, the 
quick, spontaneous interjections when thought piled 
upon thought, as I had them that day, and one can 
appreciate how great was my privilege. 

With all Jefferson's ideality and humor and phi- 
losophy there was mixed a very practical common 
sense. His perfectly balanced mind realized the 
value of each element in its place. He believed it an 
artist's duty to make every effort to reap the reward 
of his talents. 

Another thing he dwelt upon was the necessity of 
lying fallow occasionally — "Looking at the world 
with your hands in your pockets," he called it. "Try 

208 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

so to order your affairs that you have periods of 
leisure, to allow the mind to recover its balance and 
its freshness." 

One side of Jefferson's house opened out on the 
water and commanded a beautiful outlook across 
the bay. On the other side the view was blocked by 
a thick clump of trees. On the latter side he had 
caused a stained-glass window to be set, on the side 
toward the water a great single sheet of plate glass. 

"Nature paints for me a new picture here every 
hour; I have only furnished the glass and the frame. 
On the other side of the house I must be content 
with what man can do for me." 

It is always very useful to a man following one 
craft to see how the same problems arise in the 
practice of another. The problems common to all 
are the essential ones and most worth our attention. 
A canon of art which Mr. Jefferson deemed most 
important was the value of suggestion as against 
actual representation. I have referred to this before. 
The illustration he gave from one of his own experi- 
ences is well worth setting down here. 

He was playing the impecunious Go-lightly in 
"Lend Me Five Shillings." In the play he puts on 
a greatcoat belonging to some one else, and to his 
joy discovers a purse full of sovereigns in its pocket. 
It was the duty of the property man to see that a 
purse was placed there every night, and Jefferson's 
part was to find and exhibit it. One night he felt in 
his pocket and no purse was there; but he must 
manage somehow to convey to the audience the im- 
pression that he had found some money. 

209 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

He said: "I turned my back to the audience, ran 
my hand down deeper into my pocket with a gesture of 
surprise, then brought out an imaginary coin which I 
seemed to hold in my hand and look at. The scene 
made such a hit as it never had before." After that, 
he said, he always played the scene without a purse. 

One little incident will give a more intimate view 
of the Jefferson household than would a whole 
chapter of description. Mr. Jefferson's young son, 
a boy of twelve or fourteen years, was an enthusiastic 
collector of butterflies. He set traps for them all 
over the place. His traps consisted of lumps of sugar 
tied with bits of thread to bushes and shrubs. Mr. 
Jefferson and I were about to start on a walk around 
the place, when the lad came out to warn us. 

"Pop, sir," he began, with a delightful mixture 
of familiarity and respect, "be careful not to dis- 
turb my butterfly traps; you know you have a very 
sweet tooth!" 

There could scarcely be a greater contrast between 
two men than that between Joe Jefferson and Grover 
Cleveland. The best explanation of their strong and 
sincere friendship seems to lie in the many-sidedness 
of Jefferson. Idealist though he was, there was a 
side to his character that was full of practical wis- 
dom, and I doubt not that the strong logical mind 
of Grover Cleveland found great pleasure in measur- 
ing thoughts with the equally strong but more 
elastic mind of Joseph Jefferson. 

When Mr. Bryan appeared like a very unruly 
meteor above the horizon in 1896, it looked to a 

210 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

good many people as though a new star or planet or 
something very real and substantial, as well as 
brilliant, had arrived. 

I was then making cartoons in Harper 9 s Weekly. 
The silver craze was at its height and it became my 
business to endeavor to show up the weak side of 
the Bryan argument — to turn this clever showman's 
scenery inside out; to expose, if possible, the cheap 
theatrical value of his performance as it appeared 
to his opponents. 

There was no doubt in the minds of those who 
saw and heard Bryan in the palmy days of his 
oratory that he was an actor of great magne- 
tism. But I recognized from the very start that 
he was just that — an actor, something of a jug- 
gler too; and, looked at from in front under the 
proper light, the illusion he produced was almost 
perfect. 

Not long ago I met an old friend of Bryan's who 
sat in Congress with him for many years. This 
friend was a Virginian — a gold Democrat. Never, 
he said, had he agreed with Mr. Bryan on any- 
thing politically, although they belonged to the 
same party. He told me of an incident which I 
think illustrates Bryan's power over an audience as 
well as any story extant. 

Mr. Bryan had met with his customary defeat for 
the Presidency a few days before, when he tele- 
graphed his Virginia friend that he was in Washing- 
ton and would like to come out and speak at his 
town if it was agreeable to him. The Virginian wired 
Mr. Bryan by all means to come. In telling the 

211 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

story he remarked that it couldn't make any differ- 
ence, as the election was over. 

There being no large hall in town, it was arranged 
for Mr. Bryan to speak in a ten-acre lot. His Vir- 
ginia friend met him with his carriage at the rail- 
road station, and to his great distress found that 
Mr. Bryan was feeling quite ill. He refused, however, 
to disappoint his audience, but requested that the 
carriage wait at the grounds and carry him imme- 
diately to his host's home when the speech was 
over. 

On arriving at the ten-acre lot Mr. Bryan was too 
weak to stand, but delivered his speech seated in 
the open carriage. He spoke for just two hours, 
and when he had finished the old colored man who 
held the reins started his horses off at a trot, but 
only succeeded in covering a few feet when the 
crowd, gathering about him, stopped the carriage 
short. The people simply could not let Bryan go. 

My Virginia friend told me that one old man, who 
was never known to speak to anyone unless he was 
compelled to do so, rushed up to the side of the 
carriage with his eyes bulging out of his head, 
shouting: "Let me touch that man's hand! Let me 
onlv touch him!" Such a demonstration as this in 
spite of all his handicaps — a defeated candidate, a 
sick man, an oration delivered by a man seated to a 
standing audience — certainly proved the unique 
power of Mr. Bryan's personality. 

Mr. Bryan has always seemed to me to represent 

a certain kind of thinking that is intensely popular 

all over the land between elections. It recognizes 

212 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the fact, which cannot be gainsaid, that our govern- 
ment is far from perfect, that organized wrong often 
defeats the efforts of unorganized right, that the 
inverse side of our glorious shield does not cor- 
respond to the side which shines and perhaps dazzles. 
But when election time comes along, the people who 
have been inclined to take the Bryan view begin to 
reflect and think a little deeper. They look at the 
brilliant shield that Mr. Bryan holds aloft — the 
shield that is to take the place of the one they already 
have; and they ask themselves if it, too, has not an 
inverse side. When the votes are counted the Bryan 
brand of thought seems to have lost its attraction to 
a sufficient number of his admirers to defeat him. 

It is perhaps too venturesome for a cartoonist to 
forsake his pencil and attempt to pass judgment on 
some of the great and near-great whom he has tried 
to fit in their proper sphere of action. But I cannot 
refrain from a few observations on orators I have 
known or listened to, which I offer for what they are 
worth. 

There was Frank Black, for instance: He could 
string together more brilliant sentences than any 
man I ever heard, unless perhaps John J. Ingalls 
could equal him. Black was not gifted with a par- 
ticularly good delivery, but his speeches read with a 
smooth elegance, full of delicately put rapier thrusts. 
So far as I remember they never got Frank Black 
anywhere in the political world. To spin a fine 
phrase is to men of that type the height of success. 

I remember on one occasion, when Theodore 
Roosevelt was President and about to run for a 

213 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

second term, he and Black sat as honored guests 
at the same table at a banquet in Washington. 
Black made what everyone present took to be a 
savage and bitter attack upon the President. Such 
was the indignation of the guests, irrespective of 
party, at what everyone considered an insult to the 
President of the United States, that not a sound of 
applause was heard when Mr. Black finished his 
speecn. 

Mr. Roosevelt, however, must have estimated the 
orator at exactly what he was worth — an artist in 
clever phrases — for two months later he suggested 
Mr. Frank Black as the man to place his name in 
nomination before the Republican convention. Mr. 
Black accepted; and a comparison of the two 
speeches is the most curious example of how similes 
and words can be twisted to fit two opposite sets of 
conditions that it has ever been my privilege to 
encounter. The wording of the two speeches is 
almost identical. The similes used are the same. 
The clever phrases in the one speech are used with 
hardly a modification in the other; yet one holds 
Mr. Roosevelt up to ridicule and contempt, the other 
is all praise and adulation. I can almost hear the 
chuckle of amusement that must have been indulged 
in at the White House when Mr. Roosevelt read 
that nominating speech. 

Two other orators to whom I have listened with 
deep admiration for their skill in the use of words 
were men who made their persuasive abilities count 
at the polls. Probably no two men, entirely different 
in temperament as they were, ever made better 

314 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

impromptu speeches or more elaborate efforts on 
the stump than James A. Garfield and Benjamin 
Harrison. Harrison particularly seemed happiest 
when an unexpected call was made on him for a 
speecn. 

I once heard Grover Cleveland, who was about 
the most unready speaker I ever knew, make an 
impromptu speech which I shall never forget and 
which his little audience, I imagine, remembered 
with tingling ears for some considerable time. As 
I have said previously, Mr. Cleveland was ordinarily 
very careful in preparing his speeches on his "swing 
around the circle." With "Dan" Lamont he used 
to sit up in his private car until all hours of the 
night, composing his talks for the next day. But 
in one Tennessee city he made an impromptu speech 
which never got into the papers, thanks to the fact 
that the official reporters relied on advance copies 
of any speech on the tour. 

A great procession was passing the grand stand 
where Mr. Cleveland stood, surrounded by a local 
reception committee made up of the 61ite of the 
city. The President stood at the edge of the plat- 
form with his hat off as the people passed by. 

It happened that a large proportion of the march- 
ing throng were mountaineers, many of whom wore 
coonskin caps and strange, old-fashioned clothes 
dating from the days of Andrew Jackson. This 
seemed to amuse a number of the people back of 
Mr. Cleveland, and their laughter and chatter and 
derisive criticism of the manners and dress of the 
mountaineers, becoming louder and louder, began 

215 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

to annoy the President. Suddenly he wheeled 
around and addressed them. 

"My friends," he said, "these good people who 
are passing by have come from their homes to your 
city to do honor not to me, but to the great office 
of the Chief Magistrate of this nation. It is their 
privilege to do so, to dress as their custom on oc- 
casions like the present best suits them. I bespeak 
for them the respect which is their due." 

There was no unseemly levity after that! 

Many very kind things have been said by edi- 
torial writers and others about the power of the 
cartoon as a political weapon. The cartoonists 
are, no doubt, pleased to hear these favorable com- 
ments on their productions, but, as one of them, I 
must confess that it is the cartoon which tells some- 
thing that everybody already knew, but which had 
not been given expression, that makes the greatest 
hit. Some years ago Mr. George R. Sheldon was 
slated to run for Governor of New York. The 
announcement was to be made next day. Everybody 
knew that Mr. Sheldon was connected with a dozen 
or more corporations; he had been in Wall Street 
for years. 

To epitomize the situation I simply made a picture 
of Mr. Sheldon as a small boy playing with a train 
of cars, each car labeled with the name of a corpora' 
tion of which he was a director or officer. When the 
Herald, in which the cartoon was published, reached 
Albany next morning Mr. Sheldon's name was 
withdrawn. He was a delightfully "good sport" 
and asked me for the original, which he framed and 
216 



A WORLD WORTB WHILE 

hung up in his office. On another occasion a bill 
was up at Albany authorizing an institution on the 
Croton system to allow its sewage, after being dis- 
infected, to flow into the water supply of the city 
of New York. I made a cartoon showing a filthy 
tramp labeled "Politics," with his feet in the foun- 
tain "N. Y. Water Supply"; and it was reported 
by the newspaper correspondents that my picture 
killed the bill on sight. 

In both these cases everybody knew the facts 
as well as I did, but they needed to have them 
visualized; that is all there is in the power of the 
cartoon. 

It was in the 'seventies, I think, that Joseph 
Keppler started his great series of cartoons in 
Puck. If I were to make a cartoon characterizing 
Keppler, I should endeavor to draw a man of genius 
carrying on his back a pack of curious old German 
lithographers' traditions, but climbing up the steep 
and difficult paths of art in spite of his handicap. 
No matter if he drew a statesman with a purple 
coat and green trousers, there was something in 
his picture as a whole that was pleasing as well as 
telling or amusing. I worked with Mr. Keppler for 
a year and owed my place in his good opinion 
largely to a curious fact — namely, my admiration 
for an old German book named Ekkehard, a tale of 
mediaeval days in the Austrian mountains written 
in the exaggerated strain of German romanticism. 

"Nobody in America has before said to me he 
has ever heard of Ekkekard! " Mr. Keppler declared. 
"It is good that you should know that wonderful 
217 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

book. It is the German spirit! One cannot under- 
stand the poetry of our ancient people if he does not 
know Ekkekard" 

It was while with Mr. Keppler that I made a 
little journey one day to Schtitzen Park, up in the 
Palisades; and there I saw why Keppler drew men 
with purple coats and green trousers and why he 
liked and lived the exaggerated romanticism of Ekke- 
kard. That day I saw respectable German bankers 
in yellow vests and sky-blue coats with wreaths of 
oak leaves around their necks. One very stout 
lady pirouetted about under the trees with a red 
mortar board on her head and a tambourine in her 
hand. Fat grocers and butchers paraded through 
the woods with flower-crowned heads or adorned 
with wreaths of laurel and oak and drank their 
steins of beer absolutely unconscious of anything 
but the physical joy of living — and Manhattan 
Island only two miles away! 

The only idealists I ever knew who amounted to 
anything were the practical people who were decent 
enough not to put everything they could lay their 
hands on into their own pockets. I have heard a 
good deal about "The Sons of Mary" and "The 
Sons of Martha" lately, and people take sides as to 
which they prefer. My idea of a useful citizen would 
be a son of Mary brought up by his Aunt Martha. 

When I was one of the small boys in my home 

town, we were all wonderful idealists. We used to 

go down to a hickory grove and climb the tallest 

trees. Our object and ideal was not to gather the 

nuts, but to climb up to the topmost swaying bough. 

218 




LOOKING OVER THE CANDIDATE 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Up, up we clambered, careless of torn trousers, 
recking not of danger, never satisfied until we were 
swinging on the very highest bough that would 
bear our weight. 

There we attained our ideal; but what was there 
to do on our unstable perch except to "holler"? 
Not a thing, save to climb down again as gracefully 
as possible and have our dear mothers mend our 
trousers before our fathers got home from business. 
While this is a very realistic story, it will also serve 
as a parable. 

In politics the people who lay great claims to 
idealism are usually up on the topmost limb "hol- 
lering," while some busy politician lower down in 
the tree is stowing away the shellbark nuts that 
belong to the idealist's constituents. Perhaps it 
would be merciful not to follow the parable farther, 
and yet we must, for the torn nether garments of 
the unpractical idealist in politics have kept many 
an honest home committee busy with thread and 
needle repairing the damage. 

It is a strange thing what a potent spell there is 
in a great noise coming from a high place. Over 
and over again the torn garments are mended and 
the useless climb is repeated, until one day old 
Father Common Sense comes home early and the 
idealist's day is done. Then a very practical person 
is sent up to gather the legislative nuts for his 
constituents, and if he is fair enough not to keep 
them all himself or run off with the tree, the com- 
munity has much to be thankful for. I can see some 
weak spots in this parable, but perhaps it suggests 

219 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

what we have all seen over and over in this demo- 
cratic country. We have had experience with all 
kinds of men in responsible places: the cartoonist's 
business is to endeavor to show where Mary's off- 
spring has failed to be practical, and where Martha's 
son has forgotten that he ever had an Aunt Mary. 

Everyone has heard the old story of Henry Ward 
Beecher, who was declaring in a speech that the 
Lord always gave the United States the right man 
for the time as President, when some old Democrat 
in the audience, who had probably voted for Tilden, 
shouted, "How about Hayes?" 

"That," replied Beecher, "is a case in point. 
When the war came and we needed a man of supreme 
wisdom and great heart the Lord gave us Lincoln. 
When the war was over and the land, in turmoil, 
needed a strong man, He gave us Grant. Then the 
country was sore and needed a poultice and the 
Lord gave us a bread-and-milk President!" 

Now, with an occasional lapse of faith, I believe 
with Henry Ward Beecher. We generally get the 
kind of man we need, and we are usually fortunate 
enough to get rid of him when he has been Presi- 
dent long enough. Occasionally, perhaps, he over- 
stays; but in that case he hasn't much influence 
during the part of his term in which we could get 
on without him. 

The office of President of the United States is 

a particularly thankless one, for the incumbent 

usually starts in with practically half of one hundred 

million people against him, and of the other half, 

human nature being perverse, many immediately 

220 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

after election wish that they had voted for his 
rival. 

Thus he may, if my arithmetic is not at fault, 
have a pretty heavy majority of his fellow-country- 
men against him from the very start of his term of 
office. 

I remember that was the case with William Mc~ 
Kinley. Somebody started the silly story that he 
was a man without resolution, a man to be steered 
about by the "master hand" of Mark Hanna; and 
all the Democrats and many Republicans, ignoring 
the whole history of the man from his boyhood up, 
believed it. Without looking up exact dates, I am 
sure it was along in 1861 that William McKinley 
put on a man's uniform several sizes too large for 
his boyish frame and wore it, and later the uniform 
of an officer, with distinguished gallantry, until the 
end of the Civil War. As a private soldier he learned 
to obey and as an officer he learned to command. 
No Confederate soldier ever discovered that he had 
no "backbone," but perhaps that was because he 
never turned his back to the foe. Because he never 
climbed up to the last swaying bough and "hol- 
lered," he was put down as "too practical." But 
my idea of him is that he was a true "Son of Mary" 
brought up and trained for a great and useful career 
by his "Aunt Martha." 

I once happened by an odd accident to travel for 
a day with a former member of Mark Hanna' s 
official family. I cannot give his name, for I have 
not his permission to do so; but if this book should 
have the good fortune to go into a second print*»ig 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

I am sure he will allow me to print his indorsement 
of what follows. 

My informant is now a man of prominence on the 
Pacific coast, and it was through my accidentally 
taking the wrong train at San Francisco that I had 
the good fortune to meet him. I was busy with 
two newspapers when he came over to where I was 
sitting and introduced himself. "I imagine, from 
the way you go through your newspapers, that you 
are a newspaper man yourself/' he said. I felt that 
here was a pretty close observer, one worth talking 
to, and we were soon deep in one of those heart-to- 
heart talks which are possible only between strangers. 
We found we had many things in common, among 
others the birthright of an Ohio nativity. He was 
from the old Western Reserve, and as a young man 
had occupied the position of private secretary to 
Mark Hanna. 

"One of the most silly yarns ever invented," he 
said, "was the one representing Mark Hanna as 
dominating William McKinley, telling him what he 
must do and what he mustn't do. The real relation 
between those two men was directly the reverse. 
McKinley was Mark Hanna's ideal. To him Mark 
Hanna deferred on all occasions. He realized the 
superiority of McKinley 's intellect and of his 
ethics. 

"Mark Hanna, as everybody knows, was about 
as practical a man as politics could produce. He 
had no nice discriminating feeling for methods in 
pursuing the success of his party, but he was big 
enough and had enough good in him to recognize 

«23 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

and admire the high character of his friend, and 
McKinley was the dominating spirit in all the rela- 
tions of the two. When McKinley vetoed a propo- 
sition of Hanna's, that veto was always accepted. 
'William knows best' was Hanna's comment. Mark 
Hanna's respect for McKinley 's ideas was complete 
and his affection for him greater than any I have 
ever seen displayed by one man for another." 

This is substantially what a man who knew both 
men, one of them intimately, had to say of their 
relations. 

The last time I saw William McKinley he lay in 
the center of the rotunda at the Capitol in Wash- 
ington, his calm face turned upward from amid the 
funeral wreaths of forty-eight great states. The 
assassin's bullet had dispersed every enemy he ever 
had. A soldier standing guard over the body of this 
great President said to me: "This is our last day 
with him. We all hate to give him up.' 



99 



A good many people will remember how Goebel 
ran for Governor of Kentucky in 1899, was declared 
defeated, contested the election, and was shot 
within a stone's throw of the Statehouse in Frank- 
fort a few weeks later. After he was shot he was 
declared Governor and sworn in. He died two days 
later. That campaign was typical in many ways of 
Kentucky politics, and I was fortunate in being 
there in the midst of it. When I arrived in Frank- 
fort, Goebel was on a stumping tour in the hill 
country to the northward. I found a livery-stable 

man who said he'd like to hear Goebel himself and 

£28 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

fired from the window in the office of the Secretary 
of State, Caleb Powers, in the Executive Building, 
just to the right of the Statehouse. But the real 
facts of the case are so clouded by political preju- 
dice, perjury and fear to tell the truth (with plenty 
of excuse therefor), that not until the day of judg- 
ment will the facts be known. 

Caleb Powers, who, with Governor Taylor, was 
accused of instigating the crime, has told his story 
in a book written in prison. If one can believe it, 
no more elaborate plot was ever woven about an 
innocent man. Youtsey, the man who confessed to 
the actual shooting, afterward denied it under oath 
and swore Howard was the culprit. Then, according 
to Powers, he made three different confessions in 
jail, but the only one of these to be revealed was one 
dictated by Powers's prosecutors. Half a dozen 
other gentlemen, careless of their oaths, gave testi- 
mony, repudiated it later on, and were prosecuted 
for perjury or left to their own devices, according to 
the sweet will or political affinities of the prosecutor. 
Altogether, the shot that laid Goebel low threw the 
government of a great state entirely out of equilib- 
rium for six years. It is probable also that it shook 
out, in the end, a good deal that was corrupt and 
which it required a convulsion to get rid of. 

Goebel himself was a commonplace person, so 

far as I could judge on a very short acquaintance — 

a practical politician with little interest in anything 

beyond the success of party; yet he was the center 

of a series of dramatic incidents worthy of the 

border warfare chronicled by Walter Scott. 

226 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

All through his canvass, plots against his life 
were hatching about him, and when the election 
was over hostile horsemen from the hills, with rifles 
slung across their saddles, openly paraded the 
streets of Frankfort. 

One gentleman who was arrested on suspicion after 
the shooting had three revolvers and a knife concealed 
about him. His explanation, that they were for self- 
protection, was accepted as a matter of course. 

A few mornings after listening to Goebel's speech 
I got up at daybreak in order to catch the early- 
morning train from Frankfort. I met "Jack" 
Churn and my livery-stable friend in the early dawn, 
making for the bar. 

"Come and have a drink," was their hospitable 
invitation. "No, thanks," I replied. "I haven't 
had my breakfast." 

"Plenty of time to get drunk and sober before 
breakfast," was the cheerful reply of Mr. Chinn. 

As they turned away, a Northern man who had 
overheard the conversation said to me, "They 
drink between breaths down here!" 

We are often told that work on a newspaper makes 
a cynic of almost anyone. This has not been my 
experience of newspaper men. Only lately there 
passed away my grand old friend "Marse Henry," 
full of hearty likes and dislikes, beliefs and dis- 
beliefs — joyous alike in his attacks on his political 
opponents and in the support of his friends. 

As old Michel Montaigne said long ago and 
Benjamin Franklin said later, "He who has drained 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the full cup of life must not grumble at a few dregs 
at the bottom, but cheerfully toss them down with 
a smile." Henry Watterson lived long and, to the 
last, turned to us with a merry laugh. He was no 
cynic looking for dregs to grumble at. If you had 
asked "Marse Henry" the names of able newspaper 
writers, I think he would have put that of Josiah 
K. Ohl near the head of the list. I sat in the edi- 
torial council of the Herald with Mr. Ohl for a good 
many years. Here was a man who had lived in 
the Orient for a long time, in the Philippines, in 
Japan, and finally for six years in China. He was in 
Peking during the Boxer troubles and as a newspaper 
man had seen every phase of life all over the world. 
Yet his mind was far from cynical, and his outlook 
on life as sweet as that of a child. From his Chinese 
friends in high places, who admired and trusted him, 
he had acquired a curious penetrating faculty of 
analyzing motives, but it never shook his belief in 
the general decency and honesty of his fellow-men. 

He had, besides, the intuitive news sense that 
makes the great newspaper man, the quick and sure 
faculty of divining secret negotiations that were 
going on behind closed doors from indications that 
would escape less subtle perceptions. As a case in 
point, it happened that while he was in Peking 
secret negotiations were going on between the 
Japanese and Chinese governments. Mr. Ohl had 
known in Japan the diplomat who was representing 
that country in Peking, and was pretty well informed 
through his Chinese friends as to what was being 
discussed — what Japan was demanding and what 

228 



fc 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

China was endeavoring to avoid. Finally, one day 
the negotiations were absolutely broken off and the 
Japanese envoy returned to his own country. 
Several months later Mr. Ohl was walking down a 
narrow back street in Peking when he saw the same 
Japanese diplomat cross the way and take a side 
street that led to the Chinese government offices. 
Mr. Ohl was quite certain that the Japanese had not 
seen him, so he immediately returned to his own 
office and dictated a long cable to the New York 
Herald, giving in detail the final agreement arrived 
at by the two countries, in which the Japanese 
abandoned the objectionable features contained in 
their original demands on the Chinese government. 

When this was cabled back to Peking next day 
the Japanese diplomat came to see Mr. Ohl in his 
office, admitted that the cabled story was correct, 
and expressed his astonishment at the accuracy of 
its contents. Not another person in China knew, 
the diplomat declared, what he had been empowered 
by his government to yield to China. 

As Mr. Ohl said, in telling me this story years after- 
ward, he knew the demands of the Japanese and the 
limits to which the Chinese government would go to 
meet them. When he saw the Japanese emissary ap- 
proaching the Chinese Foreign Office by a back door 
he inferred at once that the Japanese had yielded. 

This is diverging a long way from what I started 
to write about — namely, the supposed cynicism of 
the newspaper world; but it seemed worth while to 
give a concrete example of the news sense raised 
to the nth power. The only cynics I ever came 

229 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

across in newspaper offices were a few very young 
reporters and one or two divorce editors. All the 
rest of the staff of a great newspaper are very 
human, very much like their fellow-men. 

A political cartoonist might perhaps have some 
excuse for cynicism, but he has an antidote at his 
hand in the thought that the sins of politicians, 
which appear so enormous from the publicity they 
sometimes get, are but the reflection of the neglect 
by the average citizen of his civic duties. 

The citizen of to-day who holds no office finds 
himself in about the position of the busy bee who 
produces the honey, only to have it taken away 
from him when the comb is full. Yet if he is not 
willing to continue in this slavish condition it 
requires only courage and a few hard fights to 
remedy the present evils. 

It comes within the cartoonist's province to criti- 
cize the acts of the administration as they occur, 
but that hardly gives him license to draw general 
conclusions. We are too near the scene to take it 
all in now in one great perspective; we are all 
suffering too severely from mistakes and extrava- 
gances, the profiteering by unscrupulous people, 
and the breaking down of standards, inevitable as 
the results of war, to place all the blame where it 
belongs or to give all the credit where it is due. 
But there was a period extending from the seventh 
of May, 1915, to April third, 1917, when we were 
not at war, of which it is legitimate for us to speak 
and which is now far enough away for us to get of 

it a clear view. 

£80 




EXPLAINING MUCH 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Up to the day the Lusiiania was sunk Mr. 
Wilson could plead much in extenuation of our 
attitude in respect to the Great War then going on, 
as James Gordon Bennett so truly said, " between 
civilization and savagery/' It was Mr. Wilson's 
claim that there should be some great neutral power 
to help the warring nations to a just peace. This 
was not precisely the attitude of the Good Samaritan, 
but it was a much safer one. 

Then came the greatest crime of all maritime his- 
tory. No description will ever be necessary in 
referring to it. The one word Lusiiania is sufficient. 

Within a week after that great ship was ruthlessly 
sunk with its precious freight of men and women 
and children Mr. Wilson, aided by the Machiavel- 
lian Von Bernstorff, was busy casting a wet blanket 
over the outburst of patriotic wrath of the American 
people. It is my firm belief that a call to arms while 
that righteous indignation was at its first fierce heat 
would have made impossible the plots and outrages 
which followed and which continued until we 
declared a state of war to exist which had in fact 
existed for nearly two years. 

A catalogue of the ensuing outrages is too sickening 
to be recorded. Let me only give from memory a 
partial list of the passenger ships sunk, each crime 
followed by a haggling correspondence between the 
American administration and the assassins. 

Lusiiania, Arabic, Hesperian, Ancona, Yasaka 
Maru, Ville de Ciotat, Petrolite, Persia, Sussex, 
Marian, Arabia. 

This is not all by any means, but, as Mr. Shake* 

SSI 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

speare said, "it will serve." Let us give credit 
where it is possible to the members of the adminis- 
tration after we entered the war. They will need it 
when history's great balance is completed in years 
to come. 

As I look back over those two years before we 
entered the war, it is with a deep feeling of thank- 
fulness that Von Bemstorff got no aid or comfort 
in his business of pulling wool over American eyes, 
from the cartoons in the New York Herald. 

The files of the Herald will show that every turn 
and twist of that slippery diplomatist was recorded 
in pictorial form. His own book, recently published, 
on his relations with the American government dur- 
ing the period preceding our entry into the war 
corroborates every cartoon I made relating to his 
activities in America. 

I am particular to make this record here because 
at the time the cartoons in question were appearing 
I was constantly being admonished that the admin- 
istration had secret sources of information as to the 
intentions of the German government which nobody 
knew anything about and which would put an 
entirely different interpretation on the acts and 
words of Von Bernstorff, Boy-Ed, Von Papen, 
Doctor Dernburg, et al.> and would show how all 
these gentle souls were striving with Mr. Wilson to 
bring about the peace of the world. 

If we must not attempt to foretell the verdict of 
posterity on the men and events of to-day, we can 
at least point out one curious fallacy which is 

282 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

indulged in by a class of inveterate hero-worshipers. 
Without mentioning the name, which imagination 
will easily supply, it is constantly asserted because 
such-and-such discreditable things were asserted in 
regard to Abraham Lincoln and are no whit worse 
than some of the accusations against So-and-so: 
Therefore, So-and-so will, in the verdict of posterity, 
be set up on a pedestal as high as the martyred 
President of Civil War times. The logic is quite 
equal to the old proposition "a dog is a quadruped; 
a horse is a quadruped; therefore a dog is a horse." 
But this assertion is made so constantly and in such 
good faith that perhaps it could be carried a little 
farther: Lincoln was accused of many discreditable 
acts; So-and-so was accused of many discreditable 
acts; therefore, So-and-so is as great as Lincoln. 
William Hohenzollern has been accused of still 
more discreditable acts. Therefore, Mr. Hohen- 
zollern is greater than either Lincoln or So-and-so! 



233 



CHAPTER XIV 

MANY of the younger generation of illustrators 
ask me from time to time for details of the 
black-and-white art when it began to leave 
off its swaddling clothes and stand on its own good 
American feet. They have shown a deep interest 
in any information I can give them about how the 
great advance in the art of illustrating during the 
'seventies and 'eighties was accomplished. For 
that reason it may be well to devote a good part of 
a chapter to that period, and I should advise anyone 
not interested in the subject to skip it entirely. 

Before the 'seventies there was little real effort 
on the part of American illustrators to interpret 
nature. F. O. C. Darley was a man of great talent, 
but only occasionally did he tear himself away from 
the old conventional methods. Edwin Forbes came 
nearer to a true and original style of drawing, but 
there was no general advance until Abbey and Rein- 
hart set the pace. I verily believe, however, that 
the first great impulse in the new American art of 
illustration came from Winslow Homer. When I 
went to Franklin Square an occasional drawing on 
wood still came in for Harper's Weekly from his 
hand. When one considers how totally different 
was the style and mode of thought of Homer from 

234 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Abbey or Reinhart it is hard to believe that they 
were greatly influenced by him. Nevertheless, he 
had one quality which he held up before them and 
which made a deep and lasting impression on the 
work of both of them. It was, in fact, the foundation 
on which their art was built. This was the quality 
of sincerity. Winslow Homer was perhaps the first 
American illustrator to break away from the "slip- 
pery " school which balked at the corners in drawing 
and slid with clever ignorance over every difficulty. 

Homer had an artistic sight that was too honest 
to shirk difficulties. He went straight to Nature 
for his inspiration, and so, in her infinite variety, 
found new pictures. Abbey and Reinhart were 
both impressed with the rugged truth of his work, 
and if one looks at their early illustrations their 
emancipation from the conventional style of work 
of that day can readily be seen. It is a very proud 
fact for an illustrator to reflect upon, that one of the 
greatest masters of painting, recognized the world 
over, began as a member of his craft. 

It will be of interest to any artist who may chance 
to read this to learn what Homer's drawings were 
like. I remember one particularly, a drawing on 
wood. The boxwood color is of a light, warm tone 
and this Homer used as his lightest gray, deepening 
it with a wash of India ink and painting in one or 
two high lights with white. There were not more 
than two or three tones in the picture — just broad, 
flat washes and uncompromising outlines. All that 
was there was true, but nothing unnecessary or 
fussy found a place in the drawing. His method 

9S5 



A WORLD, WORTH WHILE 

was not unlike that of the Japanese artist, Hiro- 
shigi. The subject was a young farmer boy and a 
girl in a field, a few trees in the background. But 
that simple picture comes up before me now strong 
and clear, because of its concentrated and clarified 
truth. 

As I have pointed out before, we had to do a great 
deal in the way of news pictures in those days, which 
is now done by the camera. This had its advantages 
and disadvantages. It sent us out with our sketch- 
books after material and made us quick observers — 
reporters with the pencil. Reinhart used to say "a 
line made out of doors means as much as a dozen 
in the studio," and that is a true saying if the man 
out of doors is a conscientious seeker after truth 
and hasn't fallen into conventional ways of repre- 
sentation. Another advantage in making news 
drawings was the privilege of working on the same 
wood block with a master of his craft. 

The great drawback to all that was the pace we 

had to keep up when once the drawing was started. 

Many a night I have worked straight through from 

dark until dawn, for after our work was completed 

the engraver had his still to do. It would have been 

very easy for us to give up high ideals and fall into 

a mechanical grind of turning out our work in the 

easiest and most conventional way possible, had it 

not been for the inspiration "Ned" Abbey shed 

like rays from the sun in the Harpers' office. Mr. 

Parsons, too, the art superintendent, kept before 

us the example of his own great belief in going to 

nature for inspiration. 

286 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Abbey's earnestness had as many sides to it as a 
well-cut diamond. He was just as enthusiastic 
about play as he was about work. When he worked 
he put every ounce of energy there was in him into 
his endeavor, and kept it up until suddenly he could 
concentrate no longer; then he would go out to the 
middle of the room and turn two or three of the 
cleanest, most beautiful handsprings I ever saw, 
and sit down at his work again as though nothing 
had happened. 

Once he rigged up a trapeze in the art department 
and was up aloft, busily "skinning the cat," when 
one of the firm, who always wore a high silk hat, 
happened along. It has always been a matter of 
regret to me that I was absent that day and did not 
see what happened; but the tradition in the art 
department has always been that the silk hat sud- 
denly traversed the length of the room and fell to 
the floor in a shocking condition. At any rate, the 
trapeze was missing next day. Abbey was very 
fond of the theater and I believe nobody ever enjoyed 
the old Harrigan and Hart shows more than he. 
Ned Harrigan studied people at first hand and 
Abbey recognized the truth of his types. In con- 
trast to this was Abbey's love for the musty facts of 
archaeology, which he pursued in old bookshops, old 
houses, or wherever such knowledge was to be 
found. 

I am setting down these facts, which are appaiv 
ently unrelated, to give a little idea of what there 
was in the way of background for Abbey's art, 
what manner of man it was whose influence was so 

287 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

great on the fellows who came in contact with him. 
But there was yet one quality which is the hardest 
of all to describe — his strange aloofness from the 
world he loved. He was the soul of kindness and 
generosity, would take time and trouble beyond 
anyone I ever met to teach a willing mind, and yet, 
while he was joking and laughing with me or helping 
me to solve some problem of drawing, I always had 
a feeling that he was some strange being who had 
dropped down beside me from another world or 
another time and that he might as quickly disappear. 

With an extraordinary personality such as this 
to give force to advanced ideas in illustration, 
black-and-white art developed with astonishing 
rapidity. Men came up almost overnight who had 
discovered the ever-living truth that Nature turns 
a new face, presents a new picture, to each one who 
faithfully studies her. 

Howard Pyle saw her in one phase; Smedley, in 
many respects, went closer and got a truer view 
than any; Frost saw with more verity when he 
looked at the young animals playing in the fields or 
the tramp basking in the sun. Reinhart saw the 
everyday people of his own time clearly and sanely, 
and in that no man has surpassed him. 

About this time another man of remarkable 
subtlety of sight came up in American illustration 
— Robert Blum. To him was due a little different 
type of black-and-white, not quite so virile or down- 
right, but having a quality of suggesting, rather 
than representing, which made Blum's drawings a 
delight to an artist's eye. One of the men of that 

288 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

clay whose great talents were on similar lines was 
Alfred Brennan. 

John A. Mitchell used to say he would wager his 
hat that, if he piled up one hundred drawings by the 
best men in illustration with half a dozen of Bren- 
nan's sifted in among them, any artist who looked 
over the lot would invariably stop when he came to 
a "Brennan." He had tried it and the test never 
failed. 

I am not going to speak of the men who came 
just a little later into the field. They and their 
work, much of it well worthy of the high esteem in 
which it is held here and abroad, are too well known 
to need any description. One little incident which 
happened on a recent visit of mine to Philadelphia 
is, however, worth the telling. 

A good many people will recall a series of maga- 
zine drawings which appeared some years ago of 
scenes in the streets of London, by Joseph Pennell. 
I had heard that a number of the original drawings, 
all in pen-and-ink, were in the possession of a Phila- 
delphia art dealer. I met Pennell and asked him if 
it would be possible to get a glimpse of them. He 
very kindly accompanied me to the gallery of the 
dealer and we were taken to an inner room, where a 
movable section of paneled wall concealed a large 
safe. From its fireproof interior the precious draw- 
ings were brought to us. I could not help thinking 
how little young Joe Pennell could have imagined, 
when he took those very drawings into the art 
department of Harper's or the Century, that he 
would some day see them brought out from a fire- 

239 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

proof vault, treated with all the respect that might 
have been paid to a portfolio full of government 
bonds. 

All of which reminds me that in the art depart- 
ment at Harpers 9 there used to hang a picture by 
Thomas Nast called "Small potatoes before the 
Supreme Court/ 9 in which he as a tiny figure stands 
with a laurel wreath beside him (which had fallen 
off his head) before his judges, Charles Parsons, 
George William Curtis, and Fletcher Harper. That 
drawing expressed the feelings of every artist I 
ever knew who brought in a drawing to be judged. 

I have forgotten the exact date when the Art 
Students' League was started, but it was in the 
'seventies and had a great deal to do with the 
development of the American school of illustration. 
Perhaps the sketch class, which became a part of 
the league but was of earlier origin, was of more 
service in this direction than the more conventional 
classes where the usual drawings from the plaster 
cast and from the nude figure were made. 

In the sketch class we posed for one another and 
once a week had a little exhibition of sketches on 
subjects chosen and given out to the class. The 
democratic methods of this little class, and our 
custom of meeting once a week at the studio of any 
one of us who was fortunate enough to have a 
studio, set us to thinking and working together on 
new lines. I remember most gratefully that Mr. F. 
S. Church took a little sketch, which I had pinned 
up on the wall at one of our weekly "exhibitions," 
and showed it to Mr. Parsons at Franklin Square, 

240 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

and that this kind action on his part resulted in my 
going to work for the Harper publications a few 
months later. Out of these weekly meetings, where, 
when we felt very rich, we had crackers and cheese 
and soft drinks, grew the Salmagundi Club, now 
mostly a club of painters, but in the days of its 
infancy the rallying point of the young illustrators 
as well. 

Mr. W. H. Shelton has written a most entertaining 
history of the club, which began as "The Sketch 
Class," became in 1877 the "Salmagundi Sketch 
Club" and is now known as "The Salmagundi," 
much as we speak of "The Century" or the "Union 
League." 

From Mr. Shelton's book it may be learned that 
of the illustrators Frost, Kemble, Taylor, Kelly, 
Burns, Pyle, and Abbey were all members at one 
time or another. Many painters of national repu- 
tation were also graduates of the old sketch class. 
Under a camouflage of bohemianism a great wealth 
of artistic feeling was fostered by that little band 
of young fellows, which underlies the skillful drafts- 
manship of the artists of to-day. 

Not often does the combination occur of a won- 
derful knowledge of technic and the capacity for 
great feeling and character, but nature produced 
that combination for once in the person of William 
T. Smedley. 

In the pictures Smedley made for a story by 
Thomas A. Janvier, called "The Uncle of an Angel," 
the combination shines forth in its perfection. 

241 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

But that perfection was not born too joyously. 
I have seen line drawings by Smedley which looked 
as though they had floated off the end of his pen 
like a bubble from a pipe, yet a closer examination 
showed where he had almost scraped through to the 
back of the cardboard. The paper was thin when 
he got through — but the drawing wasn't. 

We always knew that if Smedley ever undertook 
to paint he would become a master of that medium. 
His black-and-white work had the painter's quality. 
The illustrations he made for a story by Kirk 
Munroe, Dory mates y were as truly paintings as 
though they had been done in color. No American 
illustrator, to my mind, ever equaled him in the 
delineation of elderly people. You seemed to see 
in them all the experience of life — everything that 
had worn and torn and refined them. 

Smedley was a man who never was satisfied with 
his own productions. Not that any really good man 
ever is, but with him the feeling was stronger than 
in anyone else I ever knew, and it accounted largely 
for the fact that his work grew in importance and 
merit up to the very last. I say the last, for as I 
write these lines the bells are tolling for his final 
rest. In days past William T. Smedley held his 
place as one of the foremost illustrators of America, 
and to-day his death is deplored as ending the career 
of a portrait painter of the highest distinction. 

The name of C. S. Reinhart, or Stanley Reinhart, 
as his friends called him, has appeared frequently 
in these sketches. I think he was the first American 
to make pictures of contemporary life in this coun- 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

try whose work was recognized abroad as of a high 
order. Reinhart's everyday people were always 
lifted, by some secret process of his own, away from 
the commonplace. That was a gift he shared 
with Smedley. They both drew pictures of the 
people we see every day; we recognize them all — 
there is nothing missing — yet perhaps there is 
something added, and that is the beautiful art of 
the telling. 

Drawing came much easier to Reinhart than to 
Smedley. He was a very quick and accurate ob- 
server and his facility was remarkable. Smedley 
had to strive hard for all he got, but he went down 
deeper into the hearts of his characters than Rein- 
hart. Yet each gave a true picture of the life of the 
people who made up the world about him, and each 
surrounded them with an atmosphere which made 
them interesting. We used to look for a new drawing 
in Harper's Weekly by Reinhart or a new series of 
his in the Magazine as an event. His pictures of 
Gambetta and other celebrities in the French 
Chamber of Deputies were talked about for years, 
and yet they were the simplest sketches possible, 
with not a superfluous line anywhere. Reinhart's 
gift of close observation served him in many ways. 
I have heard him entertain a company for half an 
hour with an account of how he hesitated over the 
question of wearing a dinner coat or full dress at a 
bachelor dinner. Was it Stella who said, when 
Dean Swift had written a poem in praise of another 
young woman, "Oh, the Dean could write charm- 
ingly about a broomstick!"? Reinhart could make 

£43 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

entertaining stories out of quite as unpromising 
material. 

It was in 1877, or a little later, that I first remem- 
ber a tall, broad-shouldered young man, a different 
type from anyone I had met among the artists — 
rather the calm type of the scholar. He had sent in 
a drawing in deep tones. The whole story of the 
drawing was in the effect of a lantern lighting up a 
group of men at a life-saving station on the coast. 
It had power, and Charles Parsons saw that instantly. 
I remember his calling me into his office to see the 
drawing, telling me it was by a new man, Howard 
Pyle. 

Probably no man had a more direct influence on 
the younger men and women among the illustrators 
than Pyle. But admirable as was his individual 
work, I cannot say that his influence was altogether 
helpful. Pyle had numerous pupils under his in- 
struction, and it has always seemed to me that he 
failed to teach most of them the valuable side of 
his art. 

The stronger ones, of course, developed a style 
of their own, but through all their work there runs 
a Howard Pyle convention. The weaker ones got 
nothing but the convention, and their work, being 
multiplied in the magazines, served only to make 
Pyle's own work look hackneyed. If any general 
conclusion can be drawn from all this, it is that a 
man of great individuality often makes an indifferent 
teacher. His pupils are so dazzled by his outstanding 
characteristics that they lose their own view of 
nature and give us no new interpretation. 

244 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

In looking over an old file of Harper's Weekly the 
other day I came across a picture of Colonial life 
under which was printed, "Drawn by E. A. Abbey 
from a sketch by Howard Pyle." That was before 
Pyle's wings were strong enough to enable him to 
fly alone. It was in the days when most of the 
work was drawn on wood, and Pyle never was suc- 
cessful in working on the block. 

When I first met Frederic Remington he was 
already known the world over for his pictures of 
Western life. He recalled to me a little sketch on 
wrapping paper, all scrambled up in a small envelope, 
which he had mailed to the Harpers some years 
before from out in Wyoming. 

He felt he was taking a long chance. He had 
never done anything for publication, but the sketch 
was accepted. 

I listened to his story with keen interest, for I 
remembered with how much pleasure I had made a 
drawing on wood from that little crumpled sketch, 
and I recalled then having admired it greatly. But 
I had forgotten the entire circumstance long before 
the name of Frederic Remington meant anything 
to me. 

"Yes," said Remington, "it was you who intro- 
duced me to the public. That was my first appear- 
ance and I was mighty glad I fell into the hands of 
an artist who knew a cowboy saddle and a Western 
horse." 

When they dig into the ruins of some American 

museum in the year a.d. 4000 or 5000 some one will 

find fragments of wonderful little bronze horses in 

245 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

fiery action. They will speculate on the cowboy 
period of American antiquity as shown in Reming- 
ton's bronzes. Doubtless the legend of the gunmen 
of New York will be fused with the gun toters of the 
plains, and the details of "Gyp the Blood's" equip- 
ment will be found in a cowpuncher on horseback 
by Frederic Remington. 

A stranger meeting Remington for the first time 
would be likely to come away with the impression 
that he had met a man of blood and iron — his world 
divided into two classes, those who were to kill 
and those to be killed. But to one who knew the 
real Remington this was simply funny. Before the 
Spanish-American War he used to talk of "blood! 
blood! and more blood!" but a very brief experience 
in Cuba showed him that he shared with the ten- 
derest hearted a hatred of the sight of wounds and 
suffering. 

It was the picturesqueness of battles which had 
misled him into an imaginary love for "broken 
heads and bloody bones." To the end he was a big, 
overgrown boy, generous, kindly, and full of the 
charm of "make-believe." 

Along in the 'seventies an occasional big, strong 
drawing came out by a new man — Thure de Thul- 
strup. I doubt if in this day we realize how much of 
the solidity of the best American illustration is due 
to the pioneer work of De Thulstrup. He main- 
tained a robust and uncompromising technic when 
much of the best American work was just a little 

too fine-spun. 

246 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

One might object sometimes to the harsh planes 
which clashed with one another in his work; but 
one had at the same time to acknowledge the solid 
truth underlying them. His influence was great 
and lasting. 

It was in the 'seventies that little Charley Graham 
dropped down from the scenic painter's bridge and 
climbed up the corkscrew stairs of Franklin Square. 
Graham never quite broke loose from the scenic 
foreground; but if one will but pass over the in- 
evitable tree and rock in the foreground of his pic- 
tures of the Sierras and the Rockies one must admit 
that no truer pictures were ever made of the moun- 
tains in all their naked ruggedness. 

A little later W. P. Snyder made a series of draw- 
ings for Harper's Magazine which went behind the 
scenes in the production of a great magazine. 

He revealed the engraver at work, the man who 
took the proofs on an old hand press, the great 
power presses, the typesetter at his case — in fact, 
all that great machine which reproduces the work of 
writer and artist. 

I remember Snyder never appreciated what 
remarkable drawings these were. He always imag- 
ined that because the subjects were mechanical his 
drawings were mechanical also. 

One would forget a series of photographs of sim- 
ilar subjects in a day; but these drawings have held 
a strong place in my memory and admiration for 
many years. 

No record of American illustration would be com- 
plete without some recognition of the part William 

£47 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Glackens had in its development. He and Ernest 
Fuhr were responsible a few years ago for pen draw- 
ings, turned out hurriedly for publication in a daily 
paper, which were quite equal and sometimes 
superior to anything appearing in the magazines 
at that time. I have been particular to point out 
that the work of these two men appeared in a 
newspaper, for no daily paper before or since ever 
printed such an extraordinary series of pen draw- 
ings. Since that time we have learned to think of 
Glackens as a painter and Fuhr as a successful 
illustrator, but in those days they were establishing 
quite distinguished styles of their own in the diffi- 
cult art of pen-and-ink. 

It would be easy and perhaps interesting to trace 
the manner of each to its source. Glackens, it 
could readily be seen, was first taught to see nature 
by the work of Charles Keene. I think every great 
draftsman sees Nature first through the eyes of some 
other man, until by and by Nature reveals herself to 
him direct. 

Vierge, certainly one of the most original of all 
pen draftsmen, got his early inspiration from the 
work of Fortuny. And that reminds me to say that 
Fuhr followed rather in the school of Vierge; and 
splendid use he made of it, developing a style pe- 
culiarly adapted to pictures of scenes under our 
brilliant American skies and to reproduction by the 
hasty processes of a daily paper. 

The work of May Wilson Preston is an example 

of a fine original style, now wholly her own, which 

I venture to say started under the influence of the 

£48 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

work of Charles Keene and William Glackens, 
quickened by a fine sense of humor and character. 
Frederick Walker undoubtedly gave Abbey, in 
his early work, a strong inspiration. Seeing, which 
would appear to be the first thing a man with an 
artist's temperament might accomplish, is in fact 
one of the last. Nature is so vast and her light so 
blinding that we can see her, at first, only through 
the eyes of others. 

If New York ever apologized for anything — which 
it doesn't — it might begin by abasing itself for some 
of its monuments and a number of its churches. 
Instead of making excuses for the Halleck monu- 
ment, the Scott, the Sunset 4 Cox, New York simply 
laughs good-naturedly at anyone who becomes 
excited over these iniquities. 

The bronze General Bolivars (numbers one and 
two) have become classic jokes, and as I happen to 
know of an expert criticism of the original Bolivar 
on horseback, which once occupied the now empty 
pedestal on a hill in Central Park just north of the 
Eightieth Street entrance, I give it for the sake of 
true art. 

An old horse dealer, who brought many green 
country horses to New York and trained them in 
city ways, told me one day, after poor Bolivar the 
First and his charger had been taken down from 
their proud pedestal, that he very much regretted 
the loss of that remarkable group. 

"Why," said the old gentleman, as he stroked his 
long white side- whiskers, "that was the most useful 

249 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

statue in the Park! When I had a green horse town- 
broke so he'd go under the 'L' nice an' quiet and 
'd pass a steam roller and papers blowin' in the 
street, then I'd drive him into the Park an' round 
the Bolivar equestrian statue; and if he didn't 
scare at Bolivar's horse he wouldn't scare at any- 
thing on earth!" 

After a while another statue of General Bolivar 
was put up on the empty pedestal. It was not an 
improvement, apparently. It wouldn't even scare a 
horse; and it soon galloped off to the scrap heap in 
the wake of Bolivar the First. I believe another 
Bolivar statue has been designed and cast; but my 
old friend the horse dealer is no more. We may 
never know if Bolivar the Third has the supreme 
merits of the original. 

New York, while ignoring her homely, badly 
designed, and insignificant churches, is proud of 
several very beautiful and characteristic ones. It 
pays to walk over from Madison and Park Avenues 
in the morning and watch the shadows change on 
St. Thomas's. There is a beautiful view of the 
Cathedral from just west of Madison Avenue on 
Fifty-first Street. The morning sun plays over 
varied forms of irregular beauty and the impression 
is entirely different from the more formal and 
balanced effect of the two spires seen from in front. 

Farther down on Fifth Avenue is a little church 
which holds a very personal interest for me. In 
this bit of French architecture set down in the 
middle of New York you have something well worth 
looking at. It was designed in the office of Mr. 

350 




THE MOUNTAIN PEOPLE 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Hunt, but I am very sure the actual drawings were 
the work of a little Frenchman named Caspar, who 
was employed there. I saw many of the preliminary 
sketches for the church at Mr. Caspar's house with 
its characteristics as built — the flying buttresses 
and the spire springing with beautiful diminishing 
proportions directly from the earth. 

The finial on that spire was a sore point with 
Caspar. He always claimed to have designed it on 
a much larger scale, but on the builder's objection 
his finial was vetoed. The carving of ornamental 
details also displeased him, and Caspar made up his 
mind to improve the popular taste by producing 
terra-cotta ornaments of superior design and work- 
manship. To this end, while still in Mr. Hunt's 
employ, he started a small terra-cotta factory in 
Greenpoint for the manufacture of artistic archi- 
tectural ornaments. He associated with him a 
sculptor, Isaac Broome, who was an excellent 
modeler of the figure and of classic ornament, 
understood ceramic work, could fire a kiln or turn 
a vase, and who made porcelain ware that in 1876 
brought the Japanese commissioners from the Cen- 
tennial Exposition to his studio. He could cut 
marble well enough to reproduce the work of Olin 
Warner — to that great sculptor's satisfaction — could 
do everything under the sun, it seemed to me, except 
carry on a business. He and Caspar were two 
"babes in the woods" when it came to ways and 
means. 

For the sake of experience in modeling and plaster 
carving, I worked with these two men for nearly a 

351 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

year and, so far as I know, the only profits made by 
the enterprise were made by me. 

Broome had lived many years abroad in Florence 
and Paris, and little Caspar was perhaps the last 
pupil of that great authority on architecture, Violet 
LeDuc. 

To work with these men by day and listen to 
them often half the night was a pretty good substi- 
tute for an art education. Broome was one of those 
men who are interested only in what they have not 
yet accomplished. If he turned out, as he did once 
while I was* with him, a half dozen exquisitely 
colored vases, no one could induce him to make any 
more. He had accomplished that. Why waste 
time duplicating the performance? Life to him was 
a series of "stunts/' and he could not be brought to 
see, either by reason, or by poverty, or by any of the 
spurs which keep other men working at something 
they have mastered, that a prolonged effort in one 
direction was worth more than to do whatever he 
had undertaken, exactly right, once. 

Caspar when at work wore an old blouse — blue 
linen, I think — which he said was the blouse of the 
masons, builders of cathedrals. He was brought up 
in that guild, and many times recounted to me the 
training a cathedral builder must go through. 
Every operation in building must be a part of his 
experience. He must cut stone, mix mortar, lay 
masonry, model and carve ornament and the figure, 
must make working drawings and freehand draw- 
ings, color drawings — all before the final art of 

designing is reached. 

S52 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

We turned out some beautiful terra-cotta capitals, 
belt courses, and the like, but the sheriff came along 
one day and the "atelier," as Caspar fondly called 
the old shed and two kilns, was closed up and 
sealed. Caspar went West. I never saw him again. 
Broome betook himself to Blissville near the Cal- 
vary Cemetery, where he carved little stone lambs 
on the tops of tombstones for a while, wrote a book 
on Socialism, went later to Trenton and there 
modeled a beautiful colossal bust of Cleopatra and 
produced it in porcelain. This was one of the pieces 
which brought the Japanese commissioners to the 
Centennial Exposition at Philadelphia to see him. 

A picture of Broome's Cleopatra was published in 
the Century Magazine at the time it was exhibited 
in Philadelphia, but the whereabouts of the bust 
itself is a mystery to this day. 

Broome got some notion in his head that certain 
persons were trying to get the bust away from him. 
Quite in character, he took the bust out of his studio 
one dark night and buried it. Of this he told me 
years afterward — surely Cleopatra never brought 
anybody luck. 



253 



CHAPTER XV 

THE more prominent the position which a man 
occupies in the world the less well is he known. 
That sounds like a paradox; nevertheless, it 
is easily proven. What we know about such a 
man is what people say about him, and the more 
people there are who come in contact with him 
the more diverse opinions we receive. Before I 
joined the staff of the New York Herald I heard a 
great deal about James Gordon Bennett, and in 
fact I was warned by a number of people who 
thought they knew him well not to enter his employ; 
he was capricious and arbitrary, expecting absolute 
subservience. I hesitated and held up his offer for 
over a year, but finally made up my mind to take 
the place of cartoonist offered me. Even then I 
was told I would not last a year with so eccentric a 
personage. 

Eighteen years later it was with deep sorrow that 
I received the news flashed over by cable that my 
good friend James Gordon Bennett was dead. 
Eighteen years had never disclosed to me a single 
inconsiderate act on his part; nor had I received 
any capricious or arbitrary instructions in regard 
to my work. 
On one occasion, in 1907, I was called over to 

354 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Paris to see Mr. Bennett. At that time the auto- 
mobile industry was very new in this country and 
there were many accidents in the neighborhood of 
New York, due to reckless driving over roads 
unfamiliar to the drivers. A number of people had 
been killed within a few weeks in shocking accidents, 
almost all due to reckless driving. I had made a 
cartoon called "The End of the Road" which 
showed Death taking his toll. Some association of 
automobile manufacturers or advertisers had written 
a strong protest to the Herald against the publica- 
tion of this cartoon, claiming it hurt the sale of 
automobiles. 

When I went in to call on Mr. Bennett for the first 
time at his house in the Champs £lys£es he had a 
copy of the offending cartoon and all the documents 
in the case on his desk. Mr. Bennett almost imme- 
diately called my attention to the matter and asked 
me to explain why I had made a cartoon so evidently 
distasteful to the young and growing automobile 
industry. He looked very serious, and I realized 
instantly the importance of standing my ground or 
of presently* finding myself without any ground to 
stand on. So I said that the cartoon was "abso- 
lutely justified," that I owed it as a duty to the 
public to give a warning where so many lives were 
being sacrificed by careless drivers; and I made no 
excuses whatever for the cartoon. 

Mr. Bennett then picked up a paper and told me 
to listen to what he had just cabled to the "Herald 
in New York." It was an editorial stating that the 
Herald was used as an advertising medium only by 

255 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

those who found it to their advantage so to use it, 
that no industry or other agency could dictate its 
policy in editorials or cartoons, and that if the 
automobile cartoon had displeased any advertisers 
they were entirely free to take their advertisements 
from its columns. 

Of course, all this little scene had been set with a 
purpose. I think Mr. Bennett from that day felt a 
certain confidence in my sincerity, and I know his 
backing of my work on that occasion gave me a 
feeling of security and also of responsibility for my 
future course in cartoon work. In fact, that day 
was the beginning of a lasting friendship which was 
shown on his side by many cablegrams and kindly 
messages continuing up to the time of his death. 

In the early part of September, 1914, when 
opinions . in high places differed strangely one from 
another as to the rights and wrongs of the World 
War, a cable came over one night to the editor of 
the Herald. The night editor called me up at mid- 
night and said he had a message for me at the end 
of the cable to the editor from Mr. Bennett. He 
read it over the phone: "Tell Rogers there is only 
one issue in this war. It is the issue between civiliza- 
tion and savagery. — Bennett." Those were Mr. 
Bennett's instructions in the early days of Sep- 
tember, 1914, the only instructions he ever gave as 
to the cartoons during the war. If there was any 
statesman on this side of the water who realized 
what this war was about, upon whom the blame for 
starting it rested, and how it was being waged, 
before James Gordon Bennett epitomized it all in 

256 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

that one sentence, then he has for all these years 
held his peace. 

While the war was in progress in 1915 Mr. Bennett 
made one of his short visits to New York. The 
subject of his refusal to leave Paris when the govern- 
ment was removed to Bordeaux and most of the 
newspapers went with it came up in a conversation 
with him at that time. I had always felt a great 
pride in the fact that an American had so stuck to 
his post of duty, and especially a man to whom I 
was closely allied. I said just a word or two to that 
effect and Mr. Bennett chuckled. "Well," he said, 
"what else was there to do?" and that was the sub- 
stance of the whole matter to an old sportsman who 
always played the game to the limit — "What else 
was there to do? " 

Then he told me the story. The Germans were 
coming nearer and nearer every .day; Paris was 
growing more and more nervous. The government 
had fled to Bordeaux. It really began to look as 
though the Germans would be at the gates of the 
city in a few more days. 

"One of my men came to me and said, 'Mr. 
Bennett, what provision have you made for us in 
case the Germans get here? ' Of course I had to say, 
'What provision have I made for myself? I think 
the Germans will tell us what we may or may 
not do/ 

"The next morning the same man came into the 
office. It was the morning when the German army 
had arrived at the nearest point to Paris which it 
ever reached. It was this young man's duty to 

257 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

stick a pin in the map showing each advance of the 
Germans. He was so nervous by this time that he 
couldn't stick the pin within ten or fifteen miles of 
the proper position, and began talking again of the 
probability of the Germans entering Paris. 

"It was an unpleasant subject and I asked him 
kindly to think of something else. At last he man- 
aged to stick the pin within four or five miles of the 
German advanced position; then he disappeared 
and I have never seen him since! 9 ' 

That was all James Gordon Bennett had to say 
about one of the finest examples of devotion to duty 
on the part of a civilian which the story of those 
great days has brought forth. 

One incident that happened in connection with a 
visit to Paris a few years ago is worth telling. Mr. 
Bennett had sent for me to come to Paris, and one 
of the oldest members of the Herald staff called me 
into his office to give a few hints as to the etiquette 
of a visit to the " Commodore." 

First, I was to cable Mr. Bennett on my arrival 
at Queenstown; then on arriving at Liverpool I 
was to cable him again. When I left London for 
Dover I was to cable him again, and when I arrived 
in Paris I was to telephone to his office or house, I 
forget which, and inquire just what hotel he wished 
me to put up at. When that was all settled I was to 
sit down and wait for a summons to call at his house. 

When I sailed into Cork Harbor it occurred to 
me that perhaps Mr. Bennett might defer his 
anxiety as to my whereabouts until I reached the 
end of the voyage at Liverpool; and when I reached 

258 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

that port there was plenty to do in getting out my 
baggage and securing accommodations on the train 
to London. Again I neglected to allay Mr. Bennett's 
anxiety by sending him a cablegram. In London, 
where we (there were four in our party) looked 
about for a couple of days, there was too much that 
was interesting to see to bother with cablegrams. 
We arrived in Paris in due time and proceeded at 
once to the Place d'lena, where there was a quiet 
little hotel in a good location well suited to our 
needs. So far we had broken every rule of the eti- 
quette of a visit to the "Commodore" from start to 
finish. When we were comfortably settled we sent 
a note around to No. 104 Champs £lys6es, stating 
that we had arrived and were stopping on the Place 
d'lena and would be pleased to call at Mr. Bennett's 
convenience. 

One thing had been impressed upon me before I 
left New York as absolutely essential — we must 
not leave our hotel even for a moment until we were 
summoned to attend the " Commodore." But Paris 
is most alluring. We hung about the doorway of 
our hostelry the afternoon after we arrived, for 
about two hours. There was the Trocadero in plain 
sight; across the Seine the Eiffel Tower was beck- 
oning us to come over. We fell from grace and went. 
My companion, Mr. Bonte of the Herald art depart- 
ment, had a camera with him. Nothing would do, 
when we reached the Tower, which from below 
looked like a huge spider web, but he must go to 
the top and take a picture of all of Paris that could 
be caught on a 3"x4" plate. My ambition was not 

S59 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

so great. I was content to watch the little passenger 
boats creeping up and down the river. 

Bonte disappeared like a small fly in the huge 
spider web, and after a while I grew tired of waiting 
about and walked back to the hotel. There I found 
a note from Mr. Bennett telling us to call at four, 
and the clerk informed me that a messenger had 
brought it in at least an hour before. Here was a 
pretty situation. A quarter to four and Bonte 
somewhere at either the top or the bottom of the 
Eiffel Tower. I jumped into a little horse-drawn 
cab and dashed — at any rate, proceeded — toward 
the Eiffel Tower, arrived underneath it, and looked 
up into the labyrinth of trusses and beams — but 
no Bonte was visible. 

Ten, fifteen, twenty minutes passed, and then, 
sauntering toward me with a pleased expression 
on his countenance denoting success, came my 
friend. I hustled him into the cab and we made 
for the Champs £lys£es as rapidly as the old 
horse could travel; but, alas! we were more than 
half an hour late and Mr. Bennett had departed 
for his country place at Versailles. We telephoned 
his secretary next day and made an appointment 
which we kept with precise regard to time. 

Bonte, of course, had a fair excuse in his ignorance 

of the time a trip to the top of the Eiffel Tower and 

back to the ground usually takes; but a curious fact 

prevented us from advancing it. Just at that time 

a very amusing farce was being played in Paris, 

founded on an accident to the "Ferris wheel," in 

which an eloping couple sit imprisoned in one of the 

260 




YOUNG ABBEY AND HIS MENTOR. CHARLES PARSONS. 
IN FRANKLIX SQUARE 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

cars high up in the air, while tneir pursuers are in 
the car directly behind them, and no one is able to 
reach the earth. We felt pretty sure that Mr. 
Bennett knew all about this farce, and we did not 
care to make our first appearance with a perfectly 
true excuse, but one which looked like a very foolish 
bit of plagiarism. We had then to fall back on a 
bare statement that we had been sightseeing and 
did not receive his note until too late to keep the 
appointment. 

Not the least shade of displeasure was shown by 
our good host, as I remember that interview. 

Half the trouble which some of the people who 
came in contact with Mr. Bennett had with him 
arose from treating him as though they expected to 
find him different from other people. All those 
preposterous cablegrams from Queenstown, Liver- 
pool, and London would entitle the sender to be 
treated like an idiot; doubtless our delightful recep- 
tion was due to the fact that we acted like human 
beings. I am sure my comrade on that occasion 
would bear me out in the statement that you had 
only to be "a regular fellow," to show a little respect 
for yourself, in order to get and hold for life the 
respect and friendship of James Gordon Bennett. 

While on the subject of the Herald (for Bennett 
was the Herald), I must relate a personal experience 
which is so strange that I should hesitate to tell it 
if I had not the documents to prove that it actually 
took place. 

During the summer of 1912 I picked up a book 
called Brain and Personality, by Doctor Thompson, 

261 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

a purely scientific book which was published with 
the expectation of a probable sale of fifteen hundred 
or two thousand copies. I have been told that more 
than one hundred and fifty thousand copies were 
sold, so great was the popular interest in its subject- 
matter. I became fascinated with the new problems 
which the book opened up and either solved or set 
one to striving to solve in one's own way. Then a 
very strenuous political campaign started and I put 
the book aside. 

Right in the middle of the campaign I met with a 
serious accident, breaking my right arm close to the 
shoulder, and breaking my collar bone and fracturing 
my shoulder blade. Here was a pretty bag of bones. 
I sat down in front of my drawing board, waiting 
for my family physician and the surgeon who was to 
patch me up, and wondering what I was to do for 
an arm to draw with for the remainder of the cam- 
paign; and then I thought of the book, Brain and 
Personality. In it was a minute description of the 
processes of control of the organs of speech and of 
the hands by different accurately charted portions 
of the brain. Nothing in my accident had impaired 
my knowledge of my business or the motive power 
which had compelled my right hand for many 
years to obey a mind trained to do a certain work. 
Why not commandeer my left hand and compel it 
likewise to obey my will? 

I thought of the precedents in my own profession. 
Every one of them was against the possibility of 
making an untrained left hand, which had never 

drawn a stroke, take up the work of the right. 

«62 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

Mr. de Lipman, in this country, after losing the use 
of his right hand trained his left to do its work; 
but it took many weary months to accomplish this. 
Daniel Vierge, one of the great draftsmen of the 
world, had the same experience. There were one or 
two others, but no one had ever accomplished what 
I now made up my mind to attempt. When the 
doctors arrived I was busy on a cartoon, and they 
both exclaimed, "How fortunate it is that you are 
left-handed!" Of course, my left arm was very 
weak, and if I worked too long it would balk and 
run lines directly backward from the way intended; 
but I finished my cartoon before nine o'clock that 
night, called a messenger, and sent it down to the 
Herald office. 

Soon my telephone rang. The art director of the 
Herald was on the wire. 

"So you had a cartoon left over. Lucky, wasn't 
it?" 

"No," I said, "it wasn't left over; I made it this 
evening!" 

"Oh, come," was his answer, "old man, there 
ain't no such animal!" 

Not until another cartoon came down next day 
did he believe me. Of several cartoons made during 
the campaign of 1912 I can distinguish the right- 
and left-handed ones only by referring to the dates 
on which they were published. 

Of course, in the book, Brain and Personality, 
there is no method given or even hinted at for a 
control such as I have described; but from some of 
the phenomena presented bv Doctor Thompson I 

£68 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

made my own little deductions. It seemed to me 
impossible for my left hand to disobey if sufficient 
faith and power of will were exercised. In spite of 
the fact that no one has ever before, so far as re- 
corded, succeeded in instantly transferring the skill 
of his right hand to his left, I am convinced it can 
be done by anyone of fairly strong will, provided 
he has also absolute faith. 

Doctor Thompson was told of this at the time 
and sent me word that I ought by all means to write 
a full and exact account of just how this curious 
thing was accomplished — that there was no record 
of anything approaching it. I have attempted to 
give the details here, but must freely admit there 
was something about the whole affair which was 
uncanny; and, as I said in the beginning, if I had 
not the documentary proof to offer I should not dare 
to tell the story. 

Men who write are always menaced by the 
temptation to become publishers. Julian Ralph, 
star reporter of the Sun, once succumbed to this 
perilous allure and started a weekly magazine called 
Chatter. His office was up a little back alley near 
Park Row. Chatter was printed on yellow paper 
and was a lasting proof — no, not lasting; that is 
hardly the word — fleeting proof that a good reporter 
may be a poor publisher and editor. 

But Chatter was Ralph's only literary child and he 
nursed it along for several months, accumulating 
in that time a great heap of "returns" which almost 
filled the publication office. The little back alley 

£64 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

where Chatter made its home was also the meeting 
place of what was known as the Ann Street gang, 
and perhaps the yellow color of the returns gave 
them a brilliant idea. 

Everyone, of course, does not know who the 
"Ann Street gang" are. When one is awakened at 
midnight by a couple of big booming voices alarm- 
ingly shouting unintelligible cries on either side of 
the street below, be sure that is a contingent from 
the Ann Street gang. When the "gang" is abroad 
all the little newsboys disappear from the streets. 
For the time being the big fellows rule supreme. 

Ralph was sitting in his sanctum one morning 
when a hard-looking countenance appeared over the 
top of a pile of returns. "Si, boss," came a husky 
voice, "watcher goin' t'do 'thall them returns?" 

That was exactly what Ralph had been thinking 
about all morning. He didn't know. 

It appeared to be the psychological moment. 

"Tell yer w'at we'll do, mister. Me an* me pard- 
ners have a business in Newark an* Paterson. We 
sells old magazines for Harpers an* Scribners V 
the Cenchry. We'll take free or four bundles of 
yer returns out to Newark an* Paterson and see how 
they goes. If they goes good, we'll buy all y'got. 
Savvy? Y' got ter trust us for the first ones. Cash 
for all the rest." 

It didn't look exactly like affluence staring him 
in the face, but Publisher Ralph felt that Chatter 
was in no position to drive a hard bargain, and pretty 
soon two or three big, husky fellows carried off 
several bundles of unsold magazines. 

265 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

By and by Ralph put on his hat and went to 
lunch. 

What was this tremendous hubbub on Nassau 
Street? An extra? What could have happened? 
Was the President assassinated? No, the "gang" 
was out, and the little newsboys cowered in the 
corners. But hoarse cries, much more articulate 
than usual, boomed up and down the streets: 

"Chatter reduced to one cent! Chatter! Chatter! 
reduced to one cent! Chatter! ChatterF 9 

Ralph dodged into the first and cheapest lunch 
place in sight. A week later he was back on the Sun. 



*06 



CHAPTER XVI 

WITH the exception of a brief mention of the 
World War in a story about James Gordon 
Bennett, these little sketches of men and 
things worth while all date back to the days before 
the world was made over — or, to be more exact, 
before its making over was begun. 

The war made or marred many reputations. In 
that fierce heat much dross was separated from the 
pure gold and was cast out. We had scarcely entered 
the great conflict before a little coterie, or, to use 
pure English, a little "bunch" of illustrators and 
poster men, met in the studio of Charles Dana 
Gibson in New York and organized for war work. 
They, or rather we, pledged ourselves to design 
posters and to do other pictorial publicity for the 
United States government without compensation 
for the duration of the war. 

There were about a dozen of us at the first meeting 
and we arranged for some of our number to go to 
Washington at once, get in touch with the depart- 
ments, and find out what propaganda was needed 
which could be carried on through pictorial art. 
It took us three months of most discouraging work 
to break our way through the armadillolike armor 
which incased the official mind. At last it dawned 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

on some one down in Washington that pictures 
might awaken interest in the various enterprises of 
war. Three or four urgent requests for posters, to 
be sent at once, came to us; and in less than a week 
we had sent designs, many of them elaborately 
worked out, to the authorities in Washington. 

Weeks passed and no response reached us. We 
sent men to see what had become of the drawings. 
In some cases the packages containing them had not 
been opened. Through all this period we held 
weekly meetings, and in spite of the discouragements 
thrown in our way more and more artists joined us. 
Finally one or two posters were accepted, and were 
printed and distributed. They instantly proved 
their effectiveness as propaganda. Rush orders 
poured in on us and soon we were almost over- 
whelmed with work. 

The problem of keeping the enthusiasm and inspir- 
ation of the artists at white heat then came up. 
English, French, Italian, and Russian officers over 
here on sick leave were pressed into that service. 
Our weekly meetings at a very modest dinner in a 
chop house became the most-talked-of functions in 
town. The after-dinner talks of some of our guests 
attracted a great number of people. As far as pos- 
sible we discouraged those who came to be enter- 
tained, but even those, in some instances, were so 
impressed by the tense atmosphere of the meetings 
that they became active workers. 

Piqued, no doubt, by the unsought prominence 
which our meetings had gained, a certain clique of 
artists, who had not volunteered to help us, got it 

268 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

into their more or less empty heads that we were 
trying to "monopolize the war work/' The idea 
of setting up a monopoly by giving thousands of 
dollars 9 worth of work for nothing seemed to us, 
who were sitting up nights or spending our week- 
ends in our studios, just a trifle amusing. So when 
these foolish people came down to one of our meetings 
and proceeded to read us a lecture on the enormity 
of our selfishness, we offered to share our monopoly 
with them then and there. 

But no! that was not exactly what they desired. 
One of their number, not quite so diplomatic as the 
others, let the tough old nine-lived financial cat 
which they had brought with them out of the bag. 
"Work which was not paid for," he declared, "was 
of little value. What we should do was to have a 
large fund set aside by the government for poster 
designs; then we would be on a sound business basis 
and able to produce worthy works of art!" 

As nearly as I can remember, that was about as 
far as he got; for at this point an unregenerate 
illustrator who had contributed weeks of his time 
to the cause interrupted the speaker with a very 
short but forcible remark. It was exceedingly rude 
so to treat a guest who was trying to advise and 
enrich us, but we felt that the money changers had 
invaded our temple and we knew there was a prec- 
edent set by the Gentlest of all Mankind for rough 
methods of driving the money changers out. From 
that night to the end of the war the subject of com- 
pensation was never raised again. 

It is to be hoped that some one of the clever 

269 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

writers who used often to come to those meetings 
has left a record of what happened there. In this 
limited account I can give only a glimpse here and 
there, where memory burned in some unforgetable 
experience. As our own boys came under fire on the 
other side and the crisis of the war became acute, 
the reaction from it all was more tense in our little 
circle (so we were often told' by those who came to 
us from the outside) than in almost any place in the 
country. The various drives required pictures, and 
in attempting to visualize the national emotion I 
think the artists were among those most deeply 
enmeshed in the enthusiasms and the depressions 
of an enterprise so uncertain as war. 

Our meetings grew so large that it became neces- 
sary to transfer them to the gallery of the Sal- 
magundi Club. These, of course, were the public 
meetings, held for their stimulating effect on the 
men who were doing the work. But the real activ- 
ities of the artists were in their studios and in the 
business office at 200 Fifth Avenue, where an enor- 
mous amount of work was accomplished by the one 
dollar less than a one-dollar-a-year secretary* Mr. 
F. D. Casey, with one assistant and a stenographer 
to help him. 

Some of the work of distributing the subjects to 
be drawn was afterward lifted from Casey's shoulders 
by a group of "captains," who handled the different 
classes of drawings used in propaganda — posters, 
cartoons, newspaper illustrations, magazine work, 
and so forth. 

I was very much amused one night by an orator 

270 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

from Washington who came up to New York to tell 
us how to run our publicity campaign. He had 
imbibed in early youth the usual idea of the irre- 
sponsibility of artists, and he told us that what we 
needed was instruction in efficiency. He came from 
Washington, where, in the early stages of the war, 
everything was standing on its head which was for- 
tunate enough to have a head at all. Time and 
money were being frittered away; and delay, delay 
was the complaint against every department of the 
government. 

I felt somewhat aggrieved at his remarks and 
gave him a short statement of what our little organ- 
ization had done without the expenditure of a dollar 
except for our office rent and our stenographer. 
We had produced hundreds of posters, cartoons, 
illustrations, and paintings, and not once had the 
delivery of the work been behind the scheduled time; 
and I asked him to name another department of 
governmental activity which could come within 
hailing distance of our record. 

Of course there was a very simple explanation of 
our success in keeping to schedule. Nine-tenths of 
us had worked for publication; we had been brought 
up on the idea that time, tide, and the printing press 
wait for no man. The fundamental difference be- 
tween us and most of the people who were trying 
to function in Washington was that we knew our 
business, while they were rank amateurs. 

Our Thursday-night dinners at the Salmagundi 
formed a melting pot into which fell some of the 
strangest ingredients ever brought together. I 

S71 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

remember a weeping Russian officer who wished us 
to go over to his country and take charge of it. 
He could see no other solution for their troubles. I 
felt, as I listened to him, that the Russian habit of 
tears was the real cause of all their ills. No one 
ever saw an American so sorry for himself or his 
country but that he would resent the slightest hint 
of anyone coming over here to settle our difficulties 
for us. But this officer in the full uniform of a 
Russian colonel begged us, without shame, to send 
Americans over there to form a government for his 
people. 

There were some nights when we had speakers 
who formed strange contrasts one to another. The 
men we soon learned to despise were the "orators," 
and the men who electrified us and charged the 
whole atmosphere with an intensity of feeling that 
sent shivers up and down one's spine were the men 
from the trenches or the destroyers or the airplanes, 
who told their simple stories awkwardly, haltingly, 
unconscious of the impression they produced. Look- 
ing back to those nights, one can recall the meta- 
morphosis of character that was constantly going on 
among the men who saw service on the other side. 
When they came back you couldn't tell a light- 
hearted actor from a Baptist preacher, a man of the 
Roman Church from a man of the Great Church of 
Outdoor. The proud had become humble and the 
humble had good cause to be proud of themselves. 

I remember two preachers who declared they had 
only learned what religion meant when they en- 
countered it in the trenches. And that brings vividly 

S72 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

to mind a night when we knew that over on the edge 
of No Man's Land our men were striving desperately 
to hold back the enemy. They had not yet taken 
the bit in their teeth and started the forward rush 
that won the war. I was perhaps one of the very 
few in that room whose minds turned back to those 
tense days of Gettysburg during the Civil War, 
days when one's heartstrings were keyed up almost 
to the breaking point. But if the feeling was new 
to most of the men in that room, it was none the 
less poignant; for the lives of their brothers and 
sons and the fate of their country were all at stake. 

Up from his seat rose a man in his thirties; a 
shock of curly brown hair gave him a boyish air. 
He wore an old tweed suit, and as he looked about 
he seemed rather embarrassed. He began talking 
to us in an apologetic manner. He felt that perhaps 
he would bore a company of painters and illustrators 
if he talked of what was on his mind, for, he said, 
he was a preacher by profession and he would like 
to tell us a little of what he had learned about re- 
ligion while among our men at the front. 

As he talked to us in his gentle, unassuming way 
I looked around the room and saw that he had 
touched the sorely strained feelings of a sensitive 
audience with a master hand. There are eternal 
verities which stand out in times of stress, and in 
expressing them this young preacher never struck 
a false note. 

Occasionally there were nights when things went 
wrong. Once we had with us an excitable Persian 
gentleman who wished to speak. His English was 

273 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

somewhat disjointed, but this was not what caused 
him to be remembered. Dinner had just begun 
when the chairman arose and announced that 

Mr. had to catch a train for Washington and 

would say a few words after the soup. 

He did. For one full hour he rambled on, dinner, 
meanwhile, growing stone cold. Nobody knows 
whether he caught his train or not, but everybody at 
that dinner hoped he missed it. 

Some person conceived the brilliant idea of having 
a three-year-old girl recite a patriotic poem one 
night, and the chairman had the double duty of 
introducing the performer and holding her up in his 
arms so that she could be seen above the tables. 
When she had finished her recitation the chairman, 
not knowing how else to do her honor, called for 
three cheers for the infant. The roar that went up 
so frightened the child that she set up a dismal 
howl and her tears fell copiously upon the chair- 
man's broad shirt front. These little mishaps 
served to relieve the strain under which we all 
labored. 

But had it not been for the inspiration of those 
meetings the really great work done by the Division 
of Pictorial Publicity in propaganda work for all 
the war drives and activities would not have been 
possible. To its chairman, Charles Dana Gibson, 
is due the credit for holding together in harmony 
many elements which had never worked together 
before; and his ready wit and tact in managing the 
weekly meetings kept our strange melting pot always 
at the boiling point, but never boiling over. 

274 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

There were other activities in war work which had 
their origin in the Division of Pictorial Publicity. 
The painters were as anxious to do their part as the 
illustrators and poster men; but their training and 
methods of thought were entirely different and 
required a different contact with the public. This 
was accomplished by means of colossal paintings 
exhibited on the avenues in cities and at fair grounds 
and other public assemblages of the people all over 
the country. Many painters also made "range 
finders/' huge landscapes used in the training camps 
of the artillery. Other painters took up camouflage 
work and outdid the cubists, futurists, and all the 
other faddists in painting what never was or will be. 

During the Victory-loan drive a call came from 
the Philadelphia Sketch Club for paintings to be 
auctioned off to the highest bidder in subscriptions 
for bonds. The Sketch Club is located on Camac 
Street in a tiny old house that dates back to Revolu- 
tionary days. From curb to curb the street is not 
over ten feet wide, and two wayfarers can scarcely 
pass on the sidewalk. A series of gigantic alle- 
gorical pictures, which were originally exhibited in 
front of the Public Library in New York, almost 
completely obliterated the little houses on either 
side, only a tiny window or a foot or two of red 
brick showing here and there. Flags and streamers 
completely filled the little street and every day an 
artist set up his easel and painted a picture which 
was auctioned off in terms of Victory-bond subscrip- 
tions in the evening. 

Mr. Devitt Welch, a young artist whose rela- 

975 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

tionship, in spirit at least, to the late P. T. Barnum 
is suspected, was the publicity director of the drive 
for the Sketch Club. My impression is that the 
idea of the club's participation in the drive came 
originally from Joseph Pennell. How well it was 
carried out is attested by the extraordinary results 
in the sale of Victory bonds. When the idea of 
auctioning off the pictures was suggested the club 
felt it would be covering itself with glory if it dis- 
posed of $100,000 worth of bonds. When the drive 
was over it had sold $3,700,000 worth. 

One day when things were going a little slow the 
young publicity director picked up a morning paper 
and discovered that Ringling's circus had just come 
to town. Commandeering a friend's motor car, he 
was out at the show grounds in a jiffy. 

"Can you spare two or three clowns and a few 
elephants for the Victory drive?" was the request 
he put to the circus people. 

They could; and the next morning two great 
warty-looking beasts came walking into Camac 
Street, followed by three clowns. One clown was 
dressed as a comic policeman and he threatened to 
arrest anyone who refused to buy a bond. Another 
clown turned handsprings and flipflaps over an old 
Revolutionary cannon at the head of the street. 
And between elephants and clowns and pictures 
and flags and bond buyers little Camac Street was 
filled from top to bottom and end to end. 

At luncheon that day I sat down at a table with 
Joseph Pennell, Mr. Norton of Drexel, Morgan & 
Co. (who had a customer's check in his pocket 

376 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

for the purchase of fifty thousand-dollar bonds 
with a picture as a bonus), and with the three 
clowns from Ringling's. 

It was such a party as only the Great War made 
possible, where a man's worth to his country was 
the sole criterion by which he was judged. 

One day about six or seven years before the Great 
War I was a passenger on board the Cunarder 
Campania on my way to England. We were ap- 
proaching the rocky shores of Ireland and the 
weather was becoming very thick. One could see 
only a little patch of rough water about the ship. 
Outside that there was nothing but a thick blanket 
of fog. 

Captain Dow came by where I was standing at 
the rail and invited me up to the bridge. 

"I've got something to show you up there. It is 
the greatest invention for the safety of men at sea 
since the compass. It was devised by some Yankee 
in your city of Boston." 

When I arrived on the bridge, as I remember it, 
there was nothing to be seen of the invention except 
two telephone receivers, one on each side of the 
man at the wheel. 

What do you think of it?" asked Captain Dow. 
There isn't much in sight to think about," I 
replied. 

"That's the beauty of it. There's no machinery 
about it. It's the simplest thing in the world: just 
two telephones, almost the same as the instruments 
you use ashore, placed one on each side of the bow 
of the ship, below the water line. They pick up the 

377 






A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

sound of a bell buoy or siren miles away. As the 
sound becomes more distinct you know you are 
approaching the warning signal. If it is louder in 
the starboard receiver you know the danger lies 
on that side and you steer accordingly." 

Every little while the officer who stood by the 
wheel would pick up the receiver and listen. We 
hadn't been long on the bridge before he called to 
the captain: "I think I get the bell, sir! Will you 
take the phone?" 

It was soon evident from Captain Dow's expres- 
sive face that he too had caught the bell. He lis- 
tened first with one receiver and then with the 
other. "We are about six miles," he said, "from 
Old Kinsale Head on the Irish coast" (or it may 
have been Galley Head, I have forgotten); and he 
had the course of the vessel changed by ever so 
little. 

"Now that relieves my mind quite a deal," the 
captain said, turning to me, "and I owe thanks to 
my Yankee friend from your city of Boston." 

A number of years went by, the Great War came 
on; finally we entered it, and one night, at a meeting 
of the Division of Pictorial Publicity in New York, 
some one was called on by the chairman to speak — 
to tell us of an invention that had been perfected 
which would make it absolutely impossible for a 
submarine to approach, without detection, within 
six or seven miles of a vessel equipped with this 
device. The direction and distance of the submarine 
would be accurately known before it could get near 
enough to do any damage. I failed to catch the name 

378 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of the speaker, and was startled to hear the very 
voice and intonation of my old and dear friend 
Frank Millet, who was lost years ago at sea on the 
wreck of the Titanic. 

The speaker was Frank's brother, Joseph Millet, 
and he described what was practically die instru- 
ment used by Captain Dow on the Campania 9 but 
carried to a much greater state of perfection. He 
told us of the long struggle he had to make shipping 
people realize how sound traveled through water. 
He would have had far less trouble explaining this 
to a group of small boys at a swimming hole; they 
know what two stones clapped together under water 
sound like! For seven years the invention which 
Captain Dow pronounced a wonderful device for 
making safe the approach of vessels to a rocky and 
fog-bound coast was rejected as impracticable by 
most of the great shipping houses of the world. It 
is needless to say that Joe Millet was Captain Dow's 
"Yankee inventor from my city of Boston." 

This account of the operation of a device which 
even in its first and crudest form was undoubtedly 
one of the greatest life-saving inventions of our 
day was written entirely from memory. I was for- 
tunate enough afterward to obtain some further 
details from Mr. Millet, which give a better idea of 
the device itself. 

Far foward in the bow of the vessel two small 
square tanks are attached to the inner sides of the 
ship. These tanks are filled with water, and thus 
between the water in the tanks and the water of the 
ocean there was only a thin division of steel, which 

S79 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

was also a good conductor of sound. In each of 
these tanks is suspended a sealed telephone trans- 
mitter connected by wires with the bridge and there 
furnished with a switch and receivers, so that the 
listener can catch the sound of either telephone at 
will. 

Mr. Millet told me an interesting story which he 
had used as a successful argument in placing his 
invention with a large steamship company. He 
had installed an experimental equipment on a ship 
bound in to Boston. 'While lying off that harbor in 
a dense fog the captain of this ship was taken 
desperately ill. Not a glimpse could be had of the 
light on which the ship depended for its position. 
The captain's wife took the telephone receivers at 
the wheel, picked up the fog bell accurately, and 
piloted the vessel safely into the harbor. 



CHAPTER XVII 

BROAD-MINDED John Mitchell, as I have 
said before, once described satire as "a 
double-edged weapon, and poisoned at that." 
The truth of this characterization makes it a car- 
toonist's duty to keep a close watch over himself. 
The cartoon which produces the strongest effect is 
one founded on the truth. If people say of your 
cartoon, "I never saw it in just that light before, 
but it's true," then you have scored a hit. 

A very prominent financier once complained to 
me of a fellow-cartoonist who portrayed him as a 
wolf. He objected to the physical likeness to a wolf, 
which he said, truly enough, did not exist. But to 
the inference that he had acted like a wolf he was 
perfectly indifferent. 

He had nice, regular, small teeth and he objected 
to being shown with fangs. I had portrayed him 
not long before as a whale swallowing a school of 
small-fry companions, and that, I think, struck him 
as a compliment. 

Mr. Thomas Piatt was rather a melancholy- 
looking old gentleman with an eye which regarded 
the world without enthusiasm. I have always felt 
he owed that fine cartoonist, C. G. Bush, a yearly 
salary for turning him into a merry-looking old 

281 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

follow with a good-humored twinkle in his eye. 
BiUvh added a humanizing touch to all the poli- 
tic i Hi is he caricatured. David B. Hill was not a 
wry sympathetic-looking character, but in Bush's 
pictures, with a feather in his hat, he had a jolly 
air of good-fellowship. 

Richard Croker gathered together all the hard 
knocks at himself in the way of cartoons that he 
could lay his hands upon, and had them printed 
in a book, which he presented to the men who had 
made them. I received a copy of the book, but I 
am uncertain to this day whether Mr. Croker's 
action was a sign of the "good sport" or of a sordid 
disregard for the opinion of the community. 

Daniel Lamont once told me that Mr. Cleveland 
carefully looked over all the cartoons of the day. 
Poultney Bigelow called on Oom Paul in the days 
before the Boer War and found the old man looking 
at a cartoon of mine on himself in Harper's Weekly. 
In the picture Oom Paul was getting the better of 
John Bull — hence his interest in the cartoon. 

Theodore Roosevelt told me that he used to look 
for Fred Opper's pictures in which he was repre- 
sented as a bad boy, and that his children got no 
end of amusement out of them, too. "Uncle Joe" 
Cannon always enjoys a cartoon on himself — or on 
anyone else, for that matter. Men with a sense of 
humor usually are ready to laugh at a hit at their 
expense, but a man who takes himself seriously — 
too seriously, perhaps — seldom gets any joy from a 
cartoon which does not flatter him. A corollary 
must be made to the statement that when people 

282 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

say "a cartoon is true" the cartoonist has scored a 
hit. Sometimes when letters pour in, as they poured 
in to the Herald office at times during the Great 
War, saying that a certain cartoon was "a lie," 
then you knew surely that the feathered shaft had 
found its mark. 

It is said to be bad policy to give away the secrets 
of one's trade; but a little general information may 
be risked without danger of flooding the market 
with a new crop of cartoonists. 

Back of the cartoonist's house there lies a little 
garden where he cultivates his ideas. This bit of 
information is for the benefit of those kindly folks 
who say to him, "I don't see how you keep it up 
day after day. Where do you get your ideas?" 
They might as well ask of a farmer, "Where did 
you get all that corn?" The farmer would tell 
them that he planted it and broke his back hoeing 
it; otherwise his crop would fail. The cartoonist 
plants his garden with carefully selected facts. 
No matter how dry these little seeds may seem, he 
knows that with proper cultivation they will pro- 
duce a crop later on. There is the whole secret of 
the cartoonist's bag of tricks laid bare. 

Change the metaphor just a little and you have: 
An ear of corn, a "shaker," and a fire. If the corn 
is popcorn and you put it in the shaker, and the 
shaker over the fire, the little hard, dry kernels 
suddenly break out into something very different 
and very surprising. So — dry facts, tossed about in 
an active mind, with a red-hot enthusiasm — that is 
the way of the cartoonist. 

288 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

There are a few cartoonists who are successful in 
their craft who do not raise their own ideas; but as 
a rule one can see a certain lack of the spontaneous 
in their productions. 

Thomas Nast was one who expressed himself, his 
own convictions, most truly. It has been said that 
some mysterious person or persons furnished him 
with the brilliant ideas which he executed with such 
strength and vigor, but I never heard a particle of 
evidence to support the story, and to one who knew 
him it seems absurd. He was a man who was pas- 
sionately in earnest in what he advocated with 
his pencil, which a man who is being coached never 
can be. 

I remember well when Matt Morgan was brought 
over from England "to put Tom Nast out of busi- 
ness/ 9 Morgan was a good draftsman, far better 
in a conventional sense than Nast; but his work 
was without conviction, and the line he used was 
sickly and weak in consequence. Thomas Nast 
drew as though the members of the old Tweed ring 
were there in person under the stinging lash. With 
all the earnestness of the castigation went a laugh 
at the culprit's expense which cut deepest of all. 
To have the skin cut off one's back was bad enough; 
but to be made ridiculous besides — that A is what 
made Nast's satire so deadly. 

Joseph Keppler was one of the few great cartoon- 
ists who depended to a large extent on others for their 
ideas; but even he had a peculiar faculty of so fusing 
another man's thought with his own that it took on 
another dimension. Keppler's mind was always in 

£84 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

a state of eruption; and what it lacked in originality 
was made up in the faculty of melting down what- 
ever was thrown into it. Certainly he was sur- 
rounded by a circle of men in the early days of Puck 
who must have been invaluable to him. 

A little later came a new group of cartoonists, 
young fellows with ideas aplenty. First of all in 
that respect I would place Fred Opper and Grant 
Hamilton. Like "Johnny Walker/* they are still 
going strong. They have kept their little gardens 
seeded and weeded and are producing a new crop 
of ideas every season. Of the two, Hamilton has 
more truly the real cartoon idea, which, contrary 
to the notion prevalent among newspaper readers 
to-day, has nothing to do with comic art. However, 
no one will quarrel with Opper because of the comic 
element in his pictures. He has made more people 
laugh, probably, than any one else in the country. 

Over in England they hold to the old distinct line 
that separates the cartoon from the comic drawing 
— the line between satire and fooling. Raven Hill, 
Townsend, and Partridge follow the general lines of 
the Tenniel cartoon — which is a good-enough model 
for anyone. That was a cartoon which did not 
exclude humor or wit; but it did exclude fooling 
and clowning. It generally declared the convic- 
tions of the best national thought, which can be 
more easily done in a little concentrated country 
like England than in a great, wide-spreading land such 
as ours. 

This country has been strongly swayed by the 
cartoon from the start. Benjamin Franklin made 

385 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

its first cartoon and had it emblazoned on a flag 
which floated from one end of the Colonies to the 
other: a coiled rattlesnake with head up high, and 
under it the caption, "Don't Tread on Me!" 

Comic art goes through its mutations pretty 
much as do its more pretentious brothers, the arts 
of painting and sculpture. The ultramodern comic 
artist frankly tells you that drawing no longer 
counts; and in this he is more honest than the 
ultramodern painter, who insists that his bad 
drawing is good. 

It is quite possible to meet the modern comic 
artist halfway and admit that artistic drawing in 
the comic art of to-day is rare. There must be 
something which partly compensates for its absence, 
and that, probably, is its crude reflection of foibles 
that exist all about us. A curious inconsistency 
comes to the surface if you mention the names of 
Caran d'Asche, A. B. Frost, Oliver Herford, Tom 
Sullivant, or the caricaturist Frueh to one of these 
scoffers at "good drawing." Ten to one he will 
wax enthusiastic over the work of any one of these 
men. Theories won't stand up for a moment 
against external axiomatic truths; good drawing, 
harmonious composition, and the elusive quality 
that can only be indicated by the word "knowing" 
compel the admiration of everyone. 

It is only once or twice in a generation that an 
Oliver Herford or a Frueh comes along with a humor 
played in tune. In their wildest exaggerations one 
feels a perfect artistic balance. I have coupled the 
names of these two men whose work is entirely dis- 

5286 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

similar on the surface, because the foundation of 
their art is the same — a wonderful faculty of con- 
veying the sure impression that they know infinitely 
more than they put down on paper — that "knowing" 
quality which makes a slight drawing rich. 

Now and then in the rough-and-ready comic 
art of a daily paper a style shines out on account of 
some sureness or beauty of line or grace of composi- 
tion. These are the qualities which mark the 
drawings of Voight, of Herb Roth, and of George 
Herriman with his preposterous "Krazy Kat." In 
this same rough-and-ready school George Luks 
began his career, and he may owe something of the 
directness of his splendid rapid-fire technic in paint- 
ing to his early training on a daily paper. It has 
always been the fashion in every art to hark back 
to the good old times when every condition was 
better, commercialism nonexistent, and pictures, 
for instance, were the expression of the artist's 
emotion and not of the art director's needs; and I 
know that a good many illustrators of to-day look 
back to the 'eighties as a golden age when conditions 
were perfect. In opposition we have always with 
us those moderns who decry everything that doesn't 
smell of new paint. 

Having practiced my profession in both of these 
periods, I may be able to shed a little light on this 
contention. An excellent painter, who began his 
career as an uncompromising impressionist and 
made his courageous way to recognition against 
great opposition, said to me one day that Abbey 
succeeded because he "played safe" and followed 

387 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

conventional lines. And yet I well remember Mr. 
Charles Parsons, art director of Harpers, showing 
me a pile of letters addressed to the editor of Har- 
per's Magazine protesting against the new-fangled 
stuff which they supposed Mr. Abbey considered 
"high art/' some of them going so far as to threaten 
to cancel their subscriptions if this outlandish style 
of illustration was not discontinued. My painter 
friend does not realize that his own work is gradu- 
ally being looked upon as academic; and Abbey 
was just as surely breaking away from conventions 
which had existed in American illustration as my 
friend the painter was from the deadly "Hudson 
River" school which dominated the painters of his 
day. In a large sense those were the good old times; 
for Winslow Homer, Abbey, Beinhart, and, a little 
later, Smedley, emancipated illustration from the 
soapy, slippery style of an earlier day. 

Sometimes I am told that illustrating is not so 
well paid now as then, but this is a grotesque error. 
For one of Abbey's drawings, I recollect, he wanted 
an expensive costume. It was to be a reproduction 
of a gown of the elaborate period of Queen Anne. 
Abbey had it made of the heaviest and finest satin, 
superintending all its details himself. 

For the drawing in which he used this elaborate 
gown he received seventy-five dollars. The gown 
cost him one hundred and fifty. Seventy-five dol- 
lars was not then considered a low price for a draw- 
ing which would easily bring from three to five 
hundred now, but Abbey was always ready to mort- 
gage his future to accomplish a high ideal, and in 

£88 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

consequence he was usually either getting into or 
just out of debt. 

Reinhart was supposed in those days to be one 
of the best-paid illustrators, but I doubt if even he 
made as much money as a third-rate man of to-day 
would consider his due. 

Not that these men of the 'eighties were dis- 
contented with their lot; on the contrary, the 
standard of living was on a less expensive scale, and 
over the men of to-day they had one distinct advan- 
tage, dear to the soul of any artist. Thanks to the 
clear vision and good common sense of wise old 
Charles Parsons, every man who came to Franklin 
Square — and that was the Mecca of illustrators in 
those days — was encouraged to be true to his own 
ideas, to develop his own style, to interpret nature 
after his own heart. If he suddenly came to the 
conclusion that he was on the wrong tack and 
started to steer away from a course long followed, 
he was not confronted with the admonition, "This 
is not an Abbey," or, "This is not a Reinhart," but 
was encouraged to keep on his way and produce a 
work with a difference dear to his soul. 

There can be no doubt that for one man who 
could do good work in illustration in the 'eighties 
there are twenty now. Technically, the general 
standard is higher now than then. Cleverness is 
abroad in the land. Perhaps the word "cleverness" 
may carry different meanings to various minds. 
Let me give the definition it holds in mine. Clever- 
ness, I should say, is the faculty of doing a difficult 

thing with apparent ease; and it immediately sug- 

£89 



►-.-.**• 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

gests that the clever person has done it before, 
over and over again. For that reason the clever 
artist is seldom creative in his work. Like the 
juggler, his performance is always the same. He 
has solved a difficult problem or two and that is 
all he has to offer. 

Commercial art has opened up a wonderful field 
for clever work, and one cannot help but admire the 
skillful technic displayed in some of it. It is a joy 
to any lover of good workmanship, and yet it is not 
exactly a satisfying development of the art of illus- 
tration. Nothing can ever compensate for the lack 
of a motif, a something which carries your imagina- 
tion out of and beyond the picture. If we have now 
lost this to a certain extent, then .the 'eighties was 
perhaps the golden age of American illustration. 

The machinery of modern life is ever becoming 
more complicated; more wheels and cogs for us all 
to be tangled up in. My old Seminole friend was 
right — "The white man seeks to multiply his de- 
sires." From all this artificiality the artist is suf- 
fering. It brings him more work to do than ever 
before, but it takes away his freedom to express 
himself. Artistically, he was better off in the Stone 
Age when he left the first records of human intelli- 
gence and aesthetic feeling on the walls of the caves 
of France and Spain. It is good discipline for a 
modern artist, when he feels a pride in his knowl- 
edge and skillful draftsmanship, to look at the 
straightforward drawings, powerful in their bald 
simplicity of those prehistoric artists. 

The first sight of the Abb6 Breuil's reproduction 

290 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

of the great drawing in the Altamira cavern of a 
charging boar gives one a thrill never to be for- 
gotten. If any modern artist has ever produced so 
great an effect with such simple means, let him 
speak up. I, for one, would travel a long way to 
see his work; and yet in this great drawing one 
feels that it was not a work of cleverness, but a 
drawing made from one tremendous impression. 

The cave man who made it perhaps saw a comrade 
gored to death by this fiery beast. Something must 
have set the image of this charging boar indelibly 
on his brain. The technic of the cave man, which 
seems to be well preserved in the reproduction, 
shows not the slightest evidence of timidity or f ussi- 
ness. Every stroke tells. 

I am not sure that the poster artists would relish 
the bald statement that they are the cave men of 
to-day; but, taken in connection with what goes 
before, they will see that in so characterizing them 
I pay them a very high compliment. 

It is violating no secret in the artists 9 world to 
say that Edward Penfield was the first man in 
America to make of posters works of art. One day 
while looking over a portfolio of French posters in 
a shop quite near the Seine in Paris I came across a 
group of Penfield's posters made to advertise Har- 
per's Magazine. The shopkeeper informed me they 
were held in very high esteem by the many French 
painters and illustrators who frequented his store. 
The beauty of these posters, many of which I can 
remember in detail, lay in an oddity of composition 

and an apparent simplicity of drawing. I say 

391 



f 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

apparent simplicity, for, as a matter of fact, it was 
the effect which was simple; the complicated 
problems back of the drawing all had been solved 
beforehand. I am very sure if Penfield had been 
born in France his work would long since have 
received the recognition of the state and, as a mural 
decorator, he would be known by works of a per- 
manent character. 

Other men who have made of their posters works 
of splendid simplicity and fine art, and who are 
recognized by their fellows as masters of their craft, 
are C. B. Falls, John Sheridan, and Adolph Treidler. 
There are others who may rank equally high with 
these, but I give here only a personal impression. 
To me these men have added to the sum of Amer- 
ican art quite as much as any contemporaneous 
painters. 

Except to draw attention to what is new in the 
development of humorous drawings, cartoons, com- 
mercial illustrations, and posters, I have refrained 
from commenting on the work of individual illus- 
trators of to-day. This comes not from any lack of 
appreciation, but rather from a feeling that in sin- 
gling out a certain few I should be doing scant justice 
to many men who are "carrying on" with equal 
skill and talent; and still it seems permissible to 
pay a little tribute to a few men who are recognized 
by all their comrades as leaders — men who have 
followed art's best traditions by avoiding beaten 
paths. In speaking of the illustrators of to-day I 
believe almost any group of the younger men would 
place Gruger and Raleigh and Wallace Morgan at 

292 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

the head of the craft in America. Having worked 
with almost every group since the days of Abbey and 
Reinhart, I would heartily indorse such a judgment. 
All this I say without prejudice to the splendid 
work of many others in the field. 

The art of illustration changes every day. Let 
us be thankful that it moves, for in stagnation is 
death. 

It is a curious fact that no writer, at least to my 
knowledge, even though he may have started out in 
life as a reporter himself, has ever given us a por- 
trait of a reporter of the first rank. It would be 
presumptuous to attempt anything of the kind 
here, but from the days of the Daily Graphic through 
my years with the Herald, and in various other con- 
nections as well, I have known some of the great 
reporters of my time, so I may perhaps venture on an 
impression or two. 

The equipment of some of these men for their 
work is often extraordinary. "Nick" Biddle, who 
wrote for the Herald up to the time of his death 
about fifteen years ago, had traveled all over the 
world to its most remote corners, knew everybody 
worth knowing, could talk or write entertainingly 
about any place or anything or anybody in the 
world. Nobody was able to rebuff him when he 
went after a piece of news, because, primarily, 
nobody wanted to. He had a slight but rather 
fascinating hesitation in his speech, which added to 
the brilliance of his conversation. 

Somebody asked Julian Ralph once how long he had 
been a journalist, and Ralph replied that he was not 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

a journalist; he was a reporter. And I suppose in 
many respects he was one of the most noted reporters 
in the world. One of his greatest qualities as an 
observer was an unprejudiced eye and ear. He had 
what artists call the "innocent eye" — that is, the 
eye which can dismiss all former impressions and 
see what is before it absolutely anew. 

I once went with him for Harper's Weekly to make 
a picture of lower Broadway. He was to do the 
story and I the picture. We both knew lower 
Broadway backward and forward, saw it every day 
of our lives. But when we arrived at that great 
thoroughfare, Ralph said : "Now let us shut our eyes 
for a moment or two — and open them on Broadway 
for the first time! Not a thing do we know of the 
old street; we are strangers; it is all new!" It 
was a great idea and was new to me then, but it 
has stood me in good stead many a time since. 

Ralph wrote a series of stories in the Sun about a 
German barber. In the language he put in the bar- 
ber's mouth he used broken English, but a German 
construction of sentences. Ralph told me as a 
great joke that a very learned professor of languages 
wrote him and referred to the profound knowledge 
of the German language shown in the construction 
of his sentences underlying the broken English. 
Ralph said that he had no knowledge of German 
whatever, but had used his ability as a reporter to 
memorize the expressions of a real German with 
whom he often talked. 

Richard Harding Davis began his career as a 

reporter on the Evening Sun, and it was while there 

S94 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

that he wrote the never-to-be-forgotten "Gallagher/* 
Davis could hardly be classed with Biddle and Ralph 
as a reporter because he was by nature a writer of 
stories; yet in a very great part of his literary work 
the keen sight of the accurate reporter is to be 
seen. "Our English Cousins" is reporting of a 
very high order. 

Don Martin is a name to bring tears to the eyes 
of any Herald man. The story of his devotion to 
our men at the front in France, to the younger men 
of his own profession who were there, as he was, to 
tell the story of our army's deeds, and his devotion 
to the service of his paper is known in every news- 
paper office in the land. 

There was a deep human note in his stories from 
the front that was scarcely equaled by any cor- 
respondent in the war zone. Not at any time a 
robust man, he used up every ounce of energy he 
possessed in the line of duty, and, although stricken 
with a fatal illness, was up and dressed in his 
correspondent's uniform within twenty hours of his 
death. Absolute faithfulness to every trust was the 
keynote of Don Martin's character. 

During the Hughes-Wilson campaign of 1916 
Martin was in charge of the Herald's straw-vote 
column. It was well known to everyone on "the 
inside" that he was Mr. Hughes's choice for secre- 
tary to the President, but in conducting the straw 
vote Don Martin never allowed his personal for- 
tunes to influence his judgment or his statements 
of facts one iota. On the night of the election, when 
the returns from the East gave every indication 

£85 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

that Hughes was elected, Don Martin told me 
that he of course was sorry to have to dispute the 
returns, but all his advance information pointed the 
other way. He had that morning published his 
conclusion based on these reports, that Mr. Wilson 
would in all probability be elected; and he stood 
by that. I know that his honest, wise, and unpreju- 
diced statements of political conditions during that 
campaign never lost him the friendship of Charles 
Evans Hughes for one moment. 

One who had no personal acquaintance with Don 
Martin might gather from this that his was a stern, 
severe personality which held men aloof, but exactly 
the opposite was the fact. Often at midnight, when 
his work was done, he would be found at his type- 
writer pounding out a little nonsense rhyme to his 
only daughter, who lived out of town; or some poor 
fellow in the craft who had fallen from a former high 
estate through illness or drink might be seen coming 
away from Martin's desk crumpling up a bill that 
could be had from Don Martin, by anyone in hard 
luck, for the asking. 

There probably never was a man in the newspaper 
world so guileless; yet Don Martin was the hardest 
man in that world to deceive. Even the scalawags 
who imposed on his good nature and his purse 
fooled him not at all. For them he had a profound 
pity which vis&l all drafts. A comrade who was 
with him in France told me that the first thing Don 
Martin did on arriving at his quarters for the night, 
after a day of exhausting work and before he began 
his dispatch to his paper, was to open his bag, bring 

£96 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

out a picture of his little daughter, and place it 
on a box or a bureau where he could see it. 

This was as invariable as the day, and it is with 
that picture, so characteristic and so deeply human, 
that I leave him. 

A very joyful occupation, to my notion, is that of 
illustrating boys' stories. J. T. Trowbridge and Kirk 
Munroe wrote fine, healthy, hearty books for boys, 
and I had the good luck to illustrate many of them. 
Brander Matthews wrote a very good boys' story 
for which I made the pictures with great joy. James 
Otis wrote "Toby Tyler", and Kirk Munroe, then 
editor of Harper's Young People, picked me out to 
make the illustrations. For that privilege I have 
been thankful ever since. The story was published 
in serial form; and week after week I made the little 
pictures, sandwiched in between news drawings and 
cartoons for Harper's Weekly. 

No one said anything about the pictures during 
that time except James Otis, who was very encourag- 
ing in his comments. So far as I could see the 
drawings were making no impression. Yet, of the 
thousands of drawings I have made since, none has 
ever brought me so many friends as those very 
simple little sketches of Toby and Old Ben and 
Mr. Stubbs. 

It was my first essay at a boys 9 story, and when 
at the end of the year the originals in pen-and-ink 
were all destroyed, as was the custom with all 
illustrations not considered worth keeping, I felt 
considerably discouraged. 

297 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

The next year I illustrated "Mr. Stubbs's 
Brother," a sequel to "Toby," and was still engaged 
on the pictures when Abbey returned from abroad, 
where he had lived for two years. He was enthu- 
siastic about Toby, had followed him from week to 
week over in London. My little pictures had made 
him homesick. "All the homely details of American 
dooryards were so true and it was boyhood all over 
again." I told him then, I recollect, that he was the 
first person except James Otis to say a word in favor 
of the drawings. Yet I can truly say that not a 
month has passed in many, many years without 
some one coming to me with a good word for the 
"Toby" pictures. 

But all this about the pictures is rather putting 
the cart before the horse. If it hadn't been for the 
genius of James Otis there would not have been 
any "Toby Tyler." Otis, when he wrote "Toby 
Tyler," was about forty years of age, but the boy 
in him got the better of the man most of the time 
even then. He had done journalistic work before 
that and at one time had written sermons for a 
syndicate; but "Toby" was, I believe, his first 
boys' story. He was the owner of several parrots 
and a small monkey when I made his acquaintance, 
and Toby's affection for Mr. Stubbs was only a 
reflection of Otis's own feelings. 

When Toby grew tired of the tame life at old 
Uncle Daniel's he was only expressing James Otis's 
restless nature. Otis had no sooner sold his story 
to Harper's Young People than he invested part of 
his money in an unsea worthy old power boat and 

208 




A LITTLE MODEL WHO POSED FOR "TOBY TYLER" 




HL'NGRY GULCH 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

started gayly for Florida. If I remember rightly he 
spent a large part of his vacation in various shipyards 
and repair shops as he gradually worked his way down 
by the inside route. Perhaps he got as far as Savan- 
nah, but I hardly think he ever reached the Florida 
waters. 

He was a wonderful companion if one was not too 
busy a person; for, boylike, he considered business 
as a miserable necessary preliminary to a renewed 
joy of living. Once when he had a severe attack of 
restlessness he started off to New Orleans in a 
canoe, embarking at Cincinnati. He wished to 
experience the adventures of another Huckleberry 
Finn, I think. After paddling down the river in the 
hot sun for half a day he was overtaken by a large 
steamboat bound for the same port. Otis felt that 
he could not compete, either in speed or in comfort, 
with so huge a craft, and had himself and his canoe 
hauled aboard, completing the voyage in much less 
time than it took Huckleberry to go half the dis- 
tance. A few months in New Orleans was enough 
to breed a longing for the North again; and, not 
having the price of a passage up the river handy, he 
wrote half a dozen of his friends to meet him either 
in person or by check at the dock in Cincinnati and 
take him and his luggage out of pawn. 

Fortunately, he had friends who thought enough 

of him to do first a little swearing and then get 

together and all break out into a roar of laughter, 

after which they delegated one of their number to 

meet Otis in Cincinnati and get him "out of hock." 

I was informed by this friend that when the steamer 

S99 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

pulled in to the landing at Cincinnati James Otis 
was to be seen up in the pilot house beside the 
captain, smoking a long black cigar. 

After this he settled down in Philadelphia, wrote 
a story, paid off his friends, was prosperous for a 
time, and then fell into a run of hard luck. It was 
during this last period that I found myself in Phila- 
delphia one day and spent a morning looking him 
up. I found the house at last, a tiny dwelling on a 
little back street — Perry Street, I think. A brass 
knocker hung on the door and I used it vigorously. 
A hollow booming was all the result obtained. Re- 
peated knocks brought no response. Finally, I 
heard a window on the top floor cautiously opened. 
A face almost hidden in an old shawl peered out 
and a voice came down: "(Jo away. (Jo away. 
Nobody lives here. I'm the caretaker. (Jo away!" 

"HI be hanged if HI go away, James Otis!" I 
answered. "Not if I have to break in your front 
door." 

"Glory! Glory!" was all that came from above 
as the window closed. And in a very few moments 
there was a great creaking of bolts as Otis took down 
the barricade and opened his front door. Poverty 
and creditors were all forgotten in a moment, for 
here was an old friend. 

We cooked up what he had in the house for lunch, 
spent a glorious afternoon talking about what Otis 
was going to do when his next book came out and 
all the wonderful places he was going to visit with 
the money, and then wound up the evening with a 
dinner downtown. 

900 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

The last years of his life were spent very quietly 
up in Maine. He got much out of life that he loved. 
Money meant nothing to him at all. He loved little 
children, although he had none of his own. But to 
other people's children, to thousands and tens of 
thousands, he gave all he had with all his heart. 

I remember once while reading Andrew Lang's 
prose translation of the Odyssey — which, by the way, 
is to my notion the most truly poetical of all trans- 
lations — it seemed for a moment that I sat by the 
fire and saw old Odysseus rise up and make a ges- 
ture as though about to start the story of his adven- 
tures. Such an experience is, of course, not for 
mortal man, but imagine what a privilege it must 
have been to see one of the most romantic characters 
of modern days under almost the same surroundings. 
I never saw John Boyle O'Reilly but once, but I 
had an excellent view of him on that occasion. He 
had just had an upset in his canoe on the Delaware 
River. He strongly resembled a magnificent statue 
in ivory and bronze as he stood by the fire, drying 
his clothes. 

His comrade on this "Inland Voyage" was Dr. 

Ramon Guiteras, and they had been cruising on the 

rivers of eastern Pennsylvania for some weeks. 

During this time they had visited the coal-mining 

region, where at that time conditions were extremely 

bad, and O'Reilly's big heart had been torn by a 

scene at a pit's mouth where the mangled bodies of 

some miners, who had been caught in a "squeeze/* 

were brought to the surface. I can see him now, a 

801 



A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

magnificent specimen of a man, his only covering a 
blanket thrown over one shoulder, his bare bronzed 
arm raised in protest to heaven against the hard lot 
of those poor fellows and of their wives and children. 

It was rather an odd meeting all around. Kirk 
M unroe and I had been up in the coal regions, too. 
Ours was a tramp trip in search of material for a 
story of a breaker boy, which Munroe was to write 
and I to illustrate. The hero, as Kirk Munroe 
planned the story, was to be a steadfast sort of boy, 
and he had tentatively picked out Sterling as his 
last name, but a good given name wasn't so easy 
to find. 

One day I sat sketching a lot of mining machinery 
at the mouth of a pit, and above everything loomed 
a great derrick which to an artist's eye suggested 
power, 

"Kirk/' I called, "IVe got a name for Sterling: 
Derrick, Derrick Sterling!" 

"Hooray!" came back the answer from Munroe, 
who was interviewing a group of grimy little breaker 
boys. "Derrick Sterling it is!" 

Having finished our business in the coal regions, 

we tramped to Bethlehem and then to Easton. We 

were on our way up the Delaware to the Water Gap 

when we met John Boyle O'Reilly and Doctor 

Guiteras at the foot of a very bad "rift," where 

they had come lo grief. I always associate that 

picture of O'Reilly with the story of his escape from 

penal servitude by swimming six miles out to sea 

to a schooner which was away beyond his range of 

vision, but which he had faith would be there waiting 

802 




A WORLD WORTH WHILE 

for him. As he stood with the light marking out the 
magnificent outlines of a perfect and harmonious 
muscular body one could readily believe him capable 
of a feat so marvelous. 

Writing of Kirk Munroe reminds me that there is 
no finer combination than the mind of a man and 
the heart of a boy. That combination is what makes 
the charm of Kirk Munroe's stories for old boys and 
young boys. Kirk Munroe began his career as a 
reporter, and he liked to get his facts at first hand. 
He had no trouble in looking at the world from a 
boy's standpoint, for he had only to look through his 
own eyes. 

One who knew Kirk Munroe only in a city environ- 
ment knew him not at all. It was by the camp fire or 
tramping through the mysterious North Woods, or 
in the illuminating flash of a paddle on a rock-bound 
lake that the real Kirk Munroe was revealed. 

I remember that once when he and I were camp- 
ing on a Canadian lake during several weeks of a 
very stormy season we lived in a little A tent set up 
on a great ledge of rock. There was a "meet" of 
canoeists there, and one night a young fellow came 
to our tent who said he hailed from Boston and had 
run up to see the "meet" for a day or so while on 
his way to Chicago. He had no tent or camp outfit, 
so we invited him to share our limited quarters. 
He was an exceedingly cheerful chap, with enthu- 
siasm enough to run a circus, and he had ideas on 
everything under the sun, which he spun out that 
night while the lightning sizzled above us and the 
thunder crashed over our rocky bed. The name of 

803 



