With a test being developed at MIT, diagnosing pneumonia and other lung conditions could someday be as easy as breathing into a tube. 
 
The test, dubbed PlasmoSniff, is a portable, chip-scale sensor that traps and detects biomarkers, synthetic compounds indicating disease. The idea is that a person would first breathe in nanoparticles that are specially designed to attach to these biomarkers, detaching from them only in the presence of specific enzymes that the body produces during an infection. Professor Sangeeta Bhatia, SM ’93, PhD ’97, and her lab have been working on such nanoparticle sensors for years.

TONY PULSONE

If the person is healthy, the particles would eventually circulate out of the body intact. In someone with a disease such as pneumonia, however, the enzymes would snip off the biomarkers, freeing them to be exhaled and measured.
 
In a 2020 paper, Bhatia’s lab demonstrated that the nanoparticles could be used to detect pneumonia in the breath of mice, but the measurements required laboratory-grade instruments not available in most doctor’s offices. Now Loza Tadesse, an assistant professor of mechanical engineering, and her colleagues have shown they can detect exhaled biomarkers of pneumonia at extremely low concentrations using an enhanced form of Raman spectroscopy, an optical technique in which molecules are illuminated with light.
 
They plan to incorporate the new sensor into a handheld instrument that could be used in clinical settings or at home. “We envision that a patient would inhale nanoparticles and, within about 10 minutes, exhale a synthetic biomarker that reports on lung status,” says Aditya Garg, an MIT postdoc and lead author of a paper on the work.
 
Detecting diseases like pneumonia is not the system’s only potential application. “It can sniff out industrial chemicals or airborne pollutants as well,” Tadesse says.
 
Keep Reading
Most Popular
A new US phone network for Christians aims to block porn and gender-related content
Launching next week on T-Mobile's network, the cell plan takes a nuclear approach to online safety.

By 
James O'Donnell
archive page
Musk v. Altman week 1: Elon Musk says he was duped, warns AI could kill us all, and admits that xAI distills OpenAI’s models
Musk kept his cool, and OpenAI’s lawyer bulldozed him with piercing questions about his motivations for suing the company.

By 
Michelle Kim
archive page
China has approved the world’s first invasive brain-computer chip—here’s what’s next
The country wants to become a global leader in brain implants. Strong government support is expected to help accelerate that process.

By 
You Xiaoying
archive page
A startup claims it broke through a bottleneck that’s holding back LLMs
Subquadratic has now shared more details about its new model. But some are still skeptical.

By 
Will Douglas Heaven
archive page
Stay connected
Illustration by Rose Wong
Get the latest updates from
MIT Technology Review
Discover special offers, top stories,
            upcoming events, and more.
