Sponsored
In partnership with
Microsoft
 
Enterprise investment in AI is booming. Gartner is calling 2026 an “
inflection year
” for organizations to align their AI projects with strategic business objectives. As the pressure to prove ROI mounts, executives and technology leaders are looking to agentic AI to drive the measurable financial outcomes their businesses seek.
 
A prime opportunity for AI agents exists in the tech function, where IT infrastructure costs are projected to grow two to three times by 2030, even as budgets remain unchanged, according to 
McKinsey
. And in the last 18 months, tech teams—the engineers, developers, architects, and other practitioners who are building, deploying, and continually improving their organizations’ infrastructure and applications—are clearly putting agents to work.

DOWNLOAD THE REPORT

The ultimate promise of agents is not only to automate tasks but to manage and coordinate entire workflows, pursuing business goals in a way that allows humans and agents to work together. Given the risks involved in automated decision-making, teams cannot delegate the work that agents do without confidence that they are fully capable of performing the task and that it will do so in a safe, reliable, and secure manner.
 
Among technology experts, our research shows that teams are exceedingly confident about using agentic AI across a significant amount of AI, data, and cloud tasks.

Where agent readiness drops is largely due to a lack of business context being supplied to agentic systems. The more complex the task, the more reasoning capability an agent requires and the greater its need for business context. Such context-generation capabilities for agents are still at an early stage of development, especially in situations where enterprise data is difficult to wrangle and connect into the agent lifecycle at the speed and quality in which developers and executives need it. Human oversight is a key factor of success in deploying agentic AI.
 
Knowing that tech teams are in a pivotal position to lead this transformation, the experts we interviewed expect agent confidence to accelerate as experience with agents deepens and business environments mature. “As we design agents to operate within the same operational boundaries, identity systems, and governance models that teams already use, they start to behave more like the systems organizations already trust,” says Jeremy Winter, corporate vice president and chief product officer at Microsoft Azure Platform.

This report, based on a survey of 300 global technology experts, ranks 101 tasks across AI, data, and cloud workflows based on respondents’ confidence in agents acting on their behalf. It also examines how technology teams view the opportunities and challenges related to agentic AI, along with the potential for the technology to enhance their careers.
 
Key findings from the report include:
 
Confidence in agents is surging for measurable tasks and growing in areas of complex judgment. 
Technology experts overwhelmingly believe agents help with everyday work including streamlining processes, improving performance, and reducing repetitive tasks. Confidence is highest for processes like generating reports and boilerplate code, and there is clear opportunity where tasks involve multistep workflows and advanced reasoning to make decisions.
 
Data workflows are the breakthrough domain. 
Tech teams trust agents most where structure can provide a reliable foundation for decisions. This includes areas such as data quality monitoring, visualization anomaly detection, real-time data stream monitoring, and data profiling. This is where domain experts closest to the point of data generation can provide context to allow agents to act and deliver trusted outcomes.
 
Download the full report.

Read the 
Microsoft Cloud blog
 by Amanda Silver, corporate vice president of Microsoft 365 Core and Work IQ, which underscores the importance of keeping humans in the loop and how systems thinking advances careers. And for a deeper dive into data workflows as a breakthrough use case for agents, check out the 
Fabric blog
 to hear from Kim Manis, corporate vice president of Product for Microsoft Fabric.
 
This content was produced by Insights, the custom content arm of MIT Technology Review. It was not written by MIT Technology Review’s editorial staff. It was researched, designed, and written by human writers, editors, analysts, and illustrators. This includes the writing of surveys and collection of data for surveys. AI tools that may have been used were limited to secondary production processes that passed thorough human review.
 
Deep Dive
Artificial intelligence
A new US phone network for Christians aims to block porn and gender-related content
Launching next week on T-Mobile's network, the cell plan takes a nuclear approach to online safety.

By 
James O'Donnell
archive page
A startup claims it broke through a bottleneck that’s holding back LLMs
Subquadratic has now shared more details about its new model. But some are still skeptical.

By 
Will Douglas Heaven
archive page
Musk v. Altman week 1: Elon Musk says he was duped, warns AI could kill us all, and admits that xAI distills OpenAI’s models
Musk kept his cool, and OpenAI’s lawyer bulldozed him with piercing questions about his motivations for suing the company.

By 
Michelle Kim
archive page
A reality check on the AI jobs hysteria
What do the numbers really say about the impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market? The answer might surprise you.

By 
David Rotman
archive page
Stay connected
Illustration by Rose Wong
Get the latest updates from
MIT Technology Review
Discover special offers, top stories,
            upcoming events, and more.
