The Argentina v. France final of the 2022 Men’s World Cup in Qatar was shaping up to be one of the most epic games in soccer history. With just 12 minutes remaining in the extra time added to the game to break a tie, the referee had a critical decision to make—and fast.
 
Lionel Messi, the Argentine captain and soccer legend, had just launched the ball past the French goal line, giving Argentina a 3–2 lead. The crowd roared, but a flag was raised. One ref thought that shortly before Messi kicked the ball, the Argentine forward Lautaro Martinez had been closer to the goal than any French players apart from the goalie when he’d received a pass—putting him in an illegal “offside” position. 

If the head referee called Martinez offside, the goal wouldn’t count. If he declared him onside, Argentina would keep its 3–2 lead with minutes left to play. 
 
The weight of more than just one offside call stood on that referee’s shoulders; it was the weight of the World Cup itself. 

But in 2022, for the first time in the storied competition’s history, referees had access to semi-automated offside technology (SAOT), a system that could rapidly analyze the play and detect an offside player. In this case, it produced an image revealing that a French defender was slightly closer to the goal than Martinez, just barely leaving the Argentine forward in a legal attacking position. 
 
The referee ruled that the goal counted: 3–2, Argentina.

SAOT produced this image to determine whether Argentine forward Lautaro Martinez (in white) was offside. It shows that only Martinez’s fingers had crossed the vertical white line into offside territory. Players’ hands and arms are not considered for offside decisions, so Martinez was declared onside.
COURTESY OF THE RESEARCHERS

Argentina eventually emerged as the champion, winning a penalty shootout after a late goal by French forward Kylian Mbappé tied the game at 3–3. Only in a parallel universe will we know how the game—and the tournament—would have played out if the referee had overturned Messi’s goal.
 
For FIFA, soccer’s international governing body, SAOT is among the latest in a portfolio of innovations used at the World Cup. From goal line technology to video assistant referee (VAR) tools, officiating tech is now commonplace at the top level of the game.
 
But SAOT is part of a broader sports technology landscape that stretches far beyond soccer. And one of the major players in that landscape is the very team that collaborated with FIFA to bring SAOT to the pitch in the first place: the MIT Sports Lab. Founded in 2015, the lab focuses on using technology and data science to tackle real problems facing athletes, teams, and sports organizations and brands. 
 
The lab has worked with FIFA, the NBA, the NFL, and Adidas, and it collaborates with a host of other sports organizations and industry players. Some of its work may be hiding in the soles of your running shoes, in the decisions your favorite NBA team makes, or even on soccer’s biggest stage—as was the case in what the AP called “probably the wildest final in the tournament’s 92-year history.”

The MIT Sports Lab’s origin story begins around 2010, when Anette “Peko” Hosoi, the Pappalardo Professor of Mechanical Engineering, fell in love with downhill mountain biking and needed a new bike. But given the varying linkage systems, shock types, and geometries, she found it difficult to choose the best one. Encountering only minimal information online, she assigned the analysis to her 2.001 class, the introductory course on mechanics. “All of my exams that semester were bike questions,” she says. They proved to be really good engineering questions too. 
 
Having recently earned tenure, she wondered, 
What if I actually built this sports thing into something bigger?
 In 2011, she began conceptualizing a project called STE@M (Sports Technology and Education at MIT), which would assemble students, faculty, athletes, and industry partners to tackle sports engineering challenges. As the effort kicked into gear over the next few years, Hosoi began collaborating with Christina Chase, MIT’s new entrepreneur in residence, and in 2015 the two of them cofounded the MIT Sports Lab. 

Mechanical engineering professor Anette “Peko” Hosoi assigned bike engineering challenges to her students when she needed a better mountain bike. In 2015, she cofounded the MIT Sports Lab with entrepreneur and MechE lecturer Christina Chase.
COURTESY OF MIT MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

“It turned out that we’re the perfect combination for this because my background comes from the math, physics, engineering side,” says Hosoi. “And she comes from the entrepreneurship [and] product development side. To really interface with these different sports companies and leagues, you need to span that whole spectrum.” Chase became the lab’s managing director and Hosoi its faculty director.

For over a decade, the Sports Lab has grown as interest in sports tech has skyrocketed—and it’s accumulated what younger fans would call some elite ball knowledge in the process. 
 
This depth is exactly what its partners need. 

“There’s more and more data that’s getting collected,” says Hosoi. “A lot of the teams, leagues, brands don’t necessarily have the in-house manpower to extract the information they need. So that’s where we can give them a boost.”

When MIT researchers looked at early skeletal data representing soccer players in motion, they saw “skeletons” flying above the ground or completely underground, in anatomically impossible positions.

The FIFA partnership has been especially fruitful—and the Sports Lab’s role in validating SAOT has probably had more impact than any other project the organizations have worked on together, says Ferran Vidal-Codina, SM ’13, PhD ’17, a former research scientist at the lab who was part of the team from FIFA, MIT, and third-party data providers that developed the technology. 
 
The system’s viability depended on the ability to quickly access and analyze what’s known as tracking data—the record of everywhere the players and the ball move throughout a game.  
 
To collect that information at top-level FIFA tournaments, data providers station about 12 state-of-the-art cameras around the stadium, capturing images at double or more the speed of normal broadcasting cameras. Computer vision algorithms then convert the feeds into what’s called skeletal data—3D representations of the players in motion. 
 
“It’s a ton of data—22 players, one referee, two assistant referees, [each with] 29 joints with XYZ coordinates, 50 times per second,” says Henry Wang ’23, a former MIT varsity swimmer who earned undergrad degrees in both business analytics and computer science, economics, and data science and is now a Sloan PhD candidate and a FIFA research consultant at the MIT Sports Lab. 

Lionel Messi scores Argentina’s third goal past Hugo Lloris of France during the final of the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar. Argentina prevailed over France in the match.
MATTHIAS HANGST/GETTY IMAGES

That works out to some 108,900 data points 
per
 
second
 for a game that lasts at least 90 minutes. And that’s just the players and referees—a chip embedded in the ball also collects position and velocity data 500 times per second
. 
In total, that’s easily more than a dozen gigabytes of skeletal data and ball-tracking data per game.
 
FIFA was thrilled to have that much data to work with. But around 2021, when third-party providers started offering skeletal data, the organization did not have the full range of technical skills needed to validate it. “So the data got sent to us,” says Wang.
 
Right away, the team at the Sports Lab saw some issues. “We saw ‘skeletons’ flying above the ground or completely underground, in anatomically impossible positions,” Vidal-Codina recalls. “We saw skeletons having their bones and limbs stretching from 30 centimeters to a few meters. We saw balls doing weird motions in the air. All sorts of stuff that when you look at it—yeah, that’s definitely not ready to be used.”

Often, when there’s a new idea in the works, “we’re the ones that take the first stab at it,” says Sports Lab researcher and PhD student Henry Wang ’23. “We are the ones that prototype and show it’s possible.”

The lab’s job in tackling this problem was first to validate the data being fed into the system and then to confirm that the SAOT algorithm itself was performing exactly as the third-party vendors claimed it would. 

In 2021 and 2022, FIFA ran a multitude of tests. Renting out a stadium for days at a time, the organization brought the data providers on site, where amateur players, or sometimes even FIFA staff, would run dozens of offside drills while those vendors collected live data.
 
The lab focused on analyzing that data and relaying the results to FIFA and its providers, which incentivized them to make improvements while casting light on blind spots they sometimes did not know they had, Vidal-Codina says. The lab was able, for example, to analyze how the call might differ if you focused on a player’s whole body, including arms and legs, or just the center of mass.

Before the technology could officially hit the pitch, the Sports Lab had to answer some key questions. First, could FIFA collect live data from the providers fast enough to make game-time assessments feasible? The researchers helped answer this by building a tool in Google Cloud to collect data as it was generated so the lab could later check the latency, allowing FIFA to understand just how “live” its data really was. 
 
Also important: determining whether two data sets—the skeletal data and the information captured by what’s known as connected ball technology—could be combined to reliably yield a correct offside call. The lab helped do just that, developing a protocol that synched the systems collecting skeletal and connected ball data. 

After validating SAOT, tweaking it, and testing it in many situations, including some official FIFA matches in 2021 and 2022, “FIFA felt it could be used at the biggest stage, which was the World Cup,” says Vidal-Codina. Indeed, FIFA president Gianni Infantino endorsed the tool himself when it debuted in Qatar.
 
Over the course of the 64-game tournament, SAOT assisted in more than 150 offside calls, some with weighty effects. Eight goals were overturned after a referee declared the scoring team offside; two goals were added to the scoreboard after a referee had incorrectly disallowed a goal that was not, in fact, offside; and in sevencases, an offside call assisted by SAOT changed the game’s outcome. 
 
These results highlight just how crucial a single offside decision can be, given the low scores typical in soccer—and how tools like SAOT can help improve the game. “Overall, decisions have been made quicker and better. That’s ultimately what we strive for,” Vidal-Codina says. 
 
The technology also takes some of the pressure off referees. “I would argue that the goal of our work is to make sure that the referee is as informed as possible about the decisions that they make,” says Wang. “It’s an incredibly difficult job.” During World Cup play, SAOT’s animated visuals were shown on stadium screens and available to as many as 5 billion viewers across platforms to help them understand the referees’ calls.  

But the technology is meant to assist referees, not replace them. “We don’t want people to think that we are automating referees. I can guarantee you the referee is not going anywhere,” Wang says. “We want to make sure that the human element is transparent, that it’s informed, and that we are helping referees do their job.”
 
SAOT may have been the Sports Lab’s highest-profile FIFA project to date, but the lab has had a hand in shaping the organization’s larger innovation pipeline. It’s helped improve the way technology—from hardware like cameras to officiating tools like SAOT—gets tested and certified on its way to the pitch. Since 2021, FIFA’s process for certifying data providers’ systems has included having the Sports Lab assess their data latency from a live data collection event using the same infrastructure it built to validate SAOT. And often, when there’s a new idea in the works, “we’re the ones that take the first stab at it,” says Wang. “We are the ones that prototype and show it’s possible. It’s a call to the industry to say: ‘Hey, this is interesting.’”

FIFA isn’t the only organization interested in the insights that tracking data can offer; the NBA has been collecting it for over a decade. In 2025, Hosoi and the MIT Sports Lab published a paper based on an NBA-MIT collaboration that had a unique focus: Instead of using the tracking data to analyze the game’s physical elements, they sought to understand the mental ones.
 
“Currently, everything physical about an athlete gets measured,” Hosoi says. “But if you talk to the organizations, they tell you that the mental part of the game is just as important. And we have no tools for measuring the mental part. So the question is, can we use the physical tracking data to extract metrics for mental performance?” 

In basketball, a big part of the mental game comes down to decisions around when to shoot and when to pass. But it’s not so easy to determine which players are making good or bad decisions. So MIT researchers created a metric called expected action value (EAV), which is essentially an assessment of the likelihood of a play’s success. Using a model trained on all 786,208 passes from the 2018–’19 NBA season and all 1.4 million shots from 2013 to 2019, they were able to figure out expected outcomes of different plays. 
 
EAV takes into account the velocity of the shot and the acceleration of the player making the shot as well as the positions of players on the court. For instance, an uncontested three-point shot from the corner has a higher EAV than a two-point attempt from a player getting double-­teamed closer to the basket (or “in the paint”). This approach can tell you not only the likelihood of a successful shot but also the chances of a successful pass. If the player decides to pass instead of shoot, and the receiver of the pass has a reasonable chance to make the shot, then that was a good decision by the passer.
 
A consistent record of high-EAV choices—passing at some times, shooting at others—means a player is making good decisions. “You can just calculate: How many times do players make good decisions? How many times do they make bad decisions? And we can rank NBA players by good decision-makers and bad decision-makers,” says Hosoi.
 
This approach can also help teams see if points are being left on the table. Given that teams averaged about 110 points per 100 possessions in the 2019 NBA season, or 1.1 points per possession, if a player passes up a play option with an EAV of more than 1.25 for a play with a lower EAV, the Sports Lab’s model classifies it as a “missed opportunity.” Flagging these moments saves time for coaches, who have to review video for at least 82 games every season. “If we can point to the time stamps of the different games where your guys might have missed an opportunity, you can take advantage of that, right?” Hosoi says.

At this point, the MIT Sports Lab doesn’t really need to advertise its services. “If you are good in sports, everybody who needs to know will know,” says Hosoi. The lab’s partners come to it if they need answers to questions—as the NFL did during the covid crisis. 
 
At the beginning of the 2020 season, some teams had opened their stadiums for limited in-person attendance while others didn’t allow any fans. In March 2021, “there was a paper that was published that said in the cities where NFL stadiums have opened, there are spikes in covid cases,” Hosoi recalls. “And the NFL called us and said, ‘Wait, is this true? Because if this is true, we’re going to stop. Can you guys do an analysis on this?’” 
 
After investigating, the Sports Lab identified a problem with the original paper. NFL teams made decisions about opening stadiums in conjunction with stadium owners and local governments. What the paper didn’t consider, however, was that some states had stricter covid protocols than others, and it was stadiums in those places that tended to stay closed to fans. 
 
The lab accounted for the confounding factors involved and found that opening a stadium with distancing and masking protocols had no effect on covid cases. In fact, the analysis found that in some places, in-person attendance was correlated with case totals that were lower than expected. Hosoi hypothesizes that this was not only because the open stadiums required distanced seating and other safety measures but also because if fans were at the stadium, they were usually outdoors—not mingling in a crowded bar or at a friend’s house. Partly on the strength of these findings, the NFL decided to open all stadiums for in-person attendance in the 2021 season.

The Sports Lab’s expertise isn’t limited to data analytics; companies are also welcome to bring their hardware and product quandaries to the lab. Adidas, for example, had announced development of a 3D-printed midsole for running shoes in 2015 and was eager to bring it to market. It partnered with Carbon, a Silicon Valley company specializing in the technology, and by around 2017 the shoe manufacturer had finally figured out a way to produce 3D-printed midsoles at a speed that could match the commercial scale.

Still, it wasn’t quite sure how to use this innovation. Adidas approached the Sports Lab with one big question, which  Sarah Fay ’15, SM ’18, PhD ’21, summarizes as “We know we can do all this cool stuff, but what should we do in order to make a high-performing shoe?”
 
“A regular running shoe just has a slab of foam in the bottom,” explains Fay, who tackled this project while earning her PhD. “You can only change the stiffness by changing the thickness. The exciting thing about 3D printing is that you can change the stiffness without having to change the shape, the footprint of the midsole—just by changing the lattice architecture.”
 
But manufacturing a high-performing shoe would be tricky: No two human runners are the same, and there was not much data from the running world at the time. So Fay turned to mechanical models—in particular, the mass-spring-damper model for analyzing a system’s dynamic behavior, which Thomas McMahon, a biomechanics pioneer at Harvard, had used to assess different running surfaces in the 1970s. “Just a simple model can be super powerful,” Fay says.
 
Fay iterated on this foundation to build a model with a center of mass, a rotating hip, and a leg that stretches. It could predict how runners of a given height, weight, and leg length would adjust their gait in response to different levels of springiness and shock absorption in a simple test shoe. This let Fay and Hosoi test gait response as they varied the stiffness of various parts of the midsole. 

Sarah Fay ’15, SM ’18, PhD ’21, holds a 3D-printed midsole for a running shoe. Working with Peko Hosoi in the Sports Lab, she developed a model that makes it possible to predict how different midsoles would affect a particular runner’s gait.
MELANIE GONICK/MIT

To ensure the accuracy of the model, they also considered that runners typically (and often unconsciously) try to minimize what they called a “biological cost function” of running, such as the impact they feel when their foot hits the ground, or the jerkiness of their gait. In multiple simulations, they optimized their model for various biological cost functions, and they compared the resulting gaits with actual gaits recorded in a previous treadmill study. Upon finding that most runners try to minimize both the impact of their feet and the amount of energy their legs expend, Fay and Hosoi were able to optimize the model for those two factors to deliver highly accurate gait projections. And the ability to predict the gait made it possible to predict how well a shoe would perform. 
 
Adidas used the model to help evaluate potential lattice-structured midsole designs, selecting the top performer for fabrication to do more formal testing. “Those are the shoes that Adidas ended up making and selling that I wear basically every day,” Fay says. She imagines that one day it could be possible to analyze running videos, determine the best shoe architectures for specific runners, and 3D-print shoes designed just for them.
 
Fay was able to fill in the mathematics and engineering expertise that the Adidas team was missing. And by giving her a way to couple her technical skills with her experience as a lifelong athlete who played both field hockey and squash at MIT, the Sports Lab may have helped her find her calling. Today, she runs a sports-related research lab of her own at Smith College, where she’s an assistant professor of engineering studying the biomechanics of soccer cleats and their role in players’ risk of knee injury. 

“The big part of sports for me is just that it was a safe space for me to learn how to be a leader, how to be a person, how to be a teammate,” she says. “And I figured that that’s a valid enough reason to make my career path head in that direction.”

What Vidal-Codina calls the “most magical feature” of the lab is that it meets its partners in the sports industry where they are. As he puts it, its scientists can say, “Okay, what do you need help with? We may have the skills or the methodology to come to a solution. So let’s sit together and try and figure it out.”

“The best thing about the Sports Lab is the community of people we’ve built—a direct connecting line from the industries and the teams to our students and to our faculty.”
 
Anette “Peko” Hosoi, Pappalardo Professor of Mechanical Engineering, MIT
 
But its work benefits the MIT community as much as it does the world of pro sports. The Sports Lab hosts an annual MIT Sports Summit, which brings technical and management professionals in sports to campus to help students, faculty, and industry figures make personal connections and share their work. Hosoi and Chase also teach 2.98 (Sports Technology: Engineering & Innovation), a class that involves MIT students in real industry projects. And the lab brings pro-level sports insights to MIT athletes, partnering with the athletics department on projects like analyzing the NCAA Power Index—the metric used to select and seed teams for the Division III national tournament—with an eye toward helping MIT teams maximize their chances of securing spots. Another project involves collecting athletes’ personalized weight-room stats into a dashboard to give coaches a window into their performance and enhance their recovery. The lab also worked with an MIT soccer player to create a tool that automatically tracks the passing sequences leading to goals, shedding light on which players contributed. It’s now widely used by the Institute’s soccer teams.
 
“The best thing about the Sports Lab is the community of people we’ve built—a direct connecting line from the industries and the teams to our students and to our faculty,” Hosoi says. “That collaboration is better than the sum of the parts.” 
 
While the lab’s work may take place behind the scenes, its influence will continue to ripple across the world of sports—from the soccer games on our televisions during this year’s World Cup to the shoes on our feet.
 
And the lab will do it by asking the most important question of all: “How can we help?” 
 
Keep Reading
Most Popular
A new US phone network for Christians aims to block porn and gender-related content
Launching next week on T-Mobile's network, the cell plan takes a nuclear approach to online safety.

By 
James O'Donnell
archive page
Musk v. Altman week 1: Elon Musk says he was duped, warns AI could kill us all, and admits that xAI distills OpenAI’s models
Musk kept his cool, and OpenAI’s lawyer bulldozed him with piercing questions about his motivations for suing the company.

By 
Michelle Kim
archive page
China has approved the world’s first invasive brain-computer chip—here’s what’s next
The country wants to become a global leader in brain implants. Strong government support is expected to help accelerate that process.

By 
You Xiaoying
archive page
A startup claims it broke through a bottleneck that’s holding back LLMs
Subquadratic has now shared more details about its new model. But some are still skeptical.

By 
Will Douglas Heaven
archive page
Stay connected
Illustration by Rose Wong
Get the latest updates from
MIT Technology Review
Discover special offers, top stories,
            upcoming events, and more.
