MIT engineers have found the first direct evidence that plant seeds can sense sounds in nature: Rice submerged in shallow water germinated 30% to 40% more quickly when exposed to vibrations from water dripping on the surface. They think other types of seeds may respond similarly.
 
When a raindrop hits a puddle’s surface or the ground, the researchers found, the vibrations from the resulting sound wave can be strong enough to dislodge tiny gravity-­sensing organelles called statoliths. The jostling of these statoliths is a signal for seeds and seedlings to grow and sprout, even if only the sound waves—not the water itself—are close enough to reach them. This phenomenon may confer a biological advantage: If seeds are close enough to the surface to respond to the sound of rain, they are likely at an optimal depth to grow.
 
“What this study is saying is that seeds can sense sound in ways that can help them survive,” says Nicholas Makris ’83, PhD ’91, a professor of mechanical engineering at MIT, who coauthored a paper on the work with Cadine Navarro, SM ’25, a former graduate student in the Department of Urban Studies and Planning. “The energy of the rain sound is enough to accelerate a seed’s growth.” 
 
Keep Reading
Most Popular
A new US phone network for Christians aims to block porn and gender-related content
Launching next week on T-Mobile's network, the cell plan takes a nuclear approach to online safety.

By 
James O'Donnell
archive page
Musk v. Altman week 1: Elon Musk says he was duped, warns AI could kill us all, and admits that xAI distills OpenAI’s models
Musk kept his cool, and OpenAI’s lawyer bulldozed him with piercing questions about his motivations for suing the company.

By 
Michelle Kim
archive page
China has approved the world’s first invasive brain-computer chip—here’s what’s next
The country wants to become a global leader in brain implants. Strong government support is expected to help accelerate that process.

By 
You Xiaoying
archive page
A startup claims it broke through a bottleneck that’s holding back LLMs
Subquadratic has now shared more details about its new model. But some are still skeptical.

By 
Will Douglas Heaven
archive page
Stay connected
Illustration by Rose Wong
Get the latest updates from
MIT Technology Review
Discover special offers, top stories,
            upcoming events, and more.
