ch Lette 


Pa 
ss 


en 
" jSenseeg per29ns # 


; Slowly Cotehaeed to Ashes 


-: Ase r4 
Ol 


AUTHORIZED EDITION 


The Complete Works of 


THE GILDED AGE. Vot., I 


Copyright, 1873, 1899, by Samuet L. Cremens and Cuarzes D. WARNER 
Copyright, 1901, by Samuret L. CLEMENS and Susan LEE WaRNER 
Copyright, 1915, by CLara GaBRILOWITSCH and Susan LEE WARNER 
Printed in the United States of America 


I-D 


CONTENTS 


IeReNOE 5 gos 6 we 8 Sw we Oe ee ss ce 
IS@ELISHER’S NOTE. . « « «© «© seus. « « 
SourrE Hawkins’s TENNESSEE LANDS . ... . 
SguirE Hawkins Aports CLAY ...... . 
UNCLE DANIEL’s First SIGHT OF A STEAMBOAT. . 
SourrE HAWKINS ON A MISSISSIPPI STEAMBOAT. . 
LauRA VAN BRUNT ADOPTED BY THE HAWKINSES . 
TeN YEARS LATER. LaurA A YOUNG BEAUTY . 
COLONEL SELLERS’S SCHEMES FOR MONEY-MAKING . 
COLONEL SELLERS ENTERTAINS WASHINGTON HAWKINS 
SourrE Hawkins Dies, LEAVING LaNps To His 
(ERE MREN le oe ss. os, ss eas 
Laura’s DiscovERY. Mrs. HAwKINs’s APPEAL. . 
A DINNER ParTy. PLAIN FARE, BRILLIANT EXPEC- 
TAMIONS << « «© « + ©. % S92.) soe 
HARRY AND Puitip Go WEsT TO Lay OuT A RAILROAD 
CoLONEL SELLERS WELCOMES THE YOUNG MEN TO 
STaLOUIS: « << » «af Gel «oe, owen 
AT PHILADELPHIA. RuTH BOLTON INTRODUCED . 
Rutu Stupres MEDICINE. A DISSECTING-ROOM. . 
MopEL RAILROAD ENGINEER. SURVEY TO STONE'S 


WANEING) . = <0 ise cuMeeewe ee 6) c= mee 
STONE’s LANDING BECOMES CiTy OF NAPOLEON—ON 
PAPER e * e e e e e e e e e e s e ° 


LAURA DECEIVED BY A Mock MARRIAGE... . 
BRIERLY FLirts WITH LAURA, AND IS FASCINATED . 
DiLworTHY, THE GOLDEN-TONGUED STATESMAN. . 


104 
112 


22 
134 
143 


155 


166 
176 
187 
198 


CHAP. 


XXI. 
XXII. 


XXIII. 
XXIV. 
XXV. 
XXVI. 
XXVII. 


XXVIII. 
XXIX. 
XXX. 


XXXII. 


CONTENTS 


RUTH AT A SEMINARY. NEW FRIENDSHIP AND 
PLEASURES . eae os ee 

PHILIP AT FALLKILL, IN Store anes SPREADS 
HIMSELF . wre 

PHILIP AND HARRY Go 1 TO Work 

THE CITy OF WASHINGTON : 

Work AT NAPOLEON (STONE’S LANDING) 

Mr. BoLton Makes ANOTHER VENTURE 

COLONEL SELLERS IN DIFFICULTIES; BUT SEES A 
Way OvuT oterae ee 

How APPROPRIATION BILLS ARE Cs 

PuHILiep SURVEYS THE ILIUM COAL-LANDS ‘ 

SENATOR DiLwortHy INVITES LauRA TO WASH- 
INGTON o +e See, a ee 

Puitip Breaks His Arm. RvutH ASSISTS THE 
SURGEON ©... «2 ui ae 

TRANSLATIONS OF CHAPTER-HEAD MOTTOES 


PAGE 


207 


216 
229 
233 
245 
253 


264 


272 
286 


297 


302 
315 


PREFACE 


HIS book was not written for private circula- 

tion among friends; it was not written to cheer 
and instruct a diseased relative of the author’s; it 
was not thrown off during intervals of wearing labor 
to amuse an idle hour. It was not written for any of 
these reasons, and therefore it is submitted without 
the usual apologies. 

It will be seen that it deals with an entirely ideal 
state of society; and the chief embarrassment of 
the writers in this realm of the imagination has been 
the want of illustrative examples. In a state where 
there is no fever of speculation, no inflamed desire 
for sudden wealth, where the poor are all simple- 
minded and contented, and the rich are all honest 
and generous, where society is in a condition of 
primitive purity, and politics is the occupation of 
only the capable and the patriotic, there are neces- 
sarily no materials for such a history as we have con- 
structed out of an ideal commonwealth. 

No apology is needed for following the learned 
custom of placing attractive scraps of literature at 
the heads of our chapters. It has been truly ob- 
served by Wagner that such headings, with their 
vague suggestions of the matter which is to follow 


PREFACE 


them, pleasantly inflame the reader’s interest with- 
out wholly satisfying his curiosity, and we will hope 
that it may be found to be so in the present case. 

Our quotations are set in a vast number of tongues; 
this is done for the reason that very few foreign 
nations among whom the book will circulate can read 
in any language but their own; whereas we do not 
write for a particular class or sect or nation, but to 
take in the whole world. 

We do not object to criticism; and we do not ex- 
pect that the critic will read the book before writing 
a notice of it. We do not even expect the reviewer 
of the book will say that he has not read it. No, 
we have no anticipations of anything unusual in this 
age of criticism. But if the Jupiter, who passes his 
opinion on the novel, ever happens to peruse it in 
some weary moment of his subsequent life, we hope 
that he will not be the victim of a remorse bitter but 
too late. 

One word more. This is—what it pretends to 
be—a joint production, in the conception of the 
story, the exposition of the characters, and in its 
literal composition. There is scarcely a chapter 
that does not bear the marks of the two writers of 


the book. 
5. LL. © 


C. D. W. 


PeeBpLIsHER Ss NOTE 


T the close of each volume will be found trans- 

lations of the mottoes placed at the heads of 

the chapters— selected for their appropriateness 

and translated by the eminent philologist, the late 

J. Hammond Trumbull, LL.D., L.H.D., from the 
various languages represented. 

The mottoes themselves have appeared in all 
the many editions of The Gilded Age heretofore 
published, but the translations have never been 
made public until now, and are therefore a feature 
of this edition. 


THE GILDED AGE 


CHAPTER I 


SQUIRE HAWKINS’S TENNESSEE LANDS 
Nibiwa win o-dibendan aki.! 


Eng. A gallant tract 
Of land it is! 

Meercraft. ’Twill yield a pound an acre: 
We must let cheap ever at first. But, sir, 
This looks too large for you, I see. 

Ben Fonson. The Devil is an Ass. 


UNE, 18—, Squire Hawkins sat upon the pyra- 
mid of large blocks, called the ‘‘stile,” in front 
of his house, contemplating the morning. 

The locality was Obedstown, east Tennessee. 
You would not know that Obedstown stood on the 
top of a mountain, for there was nothing about the 
landscape to indicate it—but it did: a mountain 
that stretched abroad over whole counties, and rose 
very gradually. The district was called the ‘‘Knobs 
of East Tennessee,” and had a reputation like 
Nazareth, as far as turning out any good thing was 
concerned. 

The Squire’s house was a double log cabin, in a 


1See Publisher’s Note. 
I 


MARK TWAIN 


state of decay; two or three gaunt hounds lay asleep 
about the threshold, and lifted their heads sadly 
whenever Mrs. Hawkins or the children stepped in 
and out over their bodies. Rubbish was scattered 
about the grassless yard; a bench stood near the 
door with a tin wash-basin on it and a pail of water 
and a gourd; a cat had begun to drink from the 
pail, but the exertion was overtaxing her energies, 
and she had stopped to rest. There was an ash- 
hopper by the fence, and an iron pot, for soft-soap- 
boiling, near it. 

This dwelling constituted one-fifteenth of Obeds- 
town; the other fourteen houses were scattered 
about among the tall pine trees and among the corn- 
fields in such a way that a man might stand in the 
midst of the city and not know but that he was in 
the country if he only depended on his eyes for 
information. 

‘“‘Squire’’ Hawkins got his title from being post- 
master of Obedstown—not that the title properly 
belonged to the office, but because in those regions 
the chief citizens always must have titles of some 
sort, and so the usual courtesy had been extended to 
Hawkins. The mail was monthly, and sometimes 
amounted to as much as three or four letters at a 
single delivery. Even a rush like this did not fill up 
the postmaster’s whole month, though, and there- 
fore he ‘‘kept store”’ in the intervals. 

The Squire was contemplating the morning. It 
was balmy and tranquil, the vagrant breezes were 
laden with the odor of flowers, the murmur of bees 
was in the air, there was everywhere that suggestion 

2 


THE GILDED AGE 


of repose that summer woodlands bring to the 
senses, and the vague pleasurable melancholy that 
such a time and such surroundings inspire. 
Presently the United States mail arrived, on 
horseback. There was but.one letter, and it was 
for the postmaster. The long-legged youth who 
carried the mail tarried an hour to talk, for there 
was no hurry; and in a little while the male popula- 
tion of the village had assembled to help. As a 
general thing, they were dressed in homespun 
‘jeans,’ blue or yellow—there were no other varie- 
ties of it; all wore one suspender and sometimes 
two—yarn ones were knitted at home—some wore 
vests, but few wore coats. Such coats and vests 
as did appear, however, were rather picturesque 
than otherwise, for they were made of tolerably 
fanciful patterns of calico—a fashion which prevails 
there to this day among those of the community 
who have tastes above the common level and are 
able to afford style. Every individual arrived with 
his hands in his pockets; a hand came out occasion- 
ally for a purpose, but it always went back again 
after service; and if it was the head that was served, 
just the cant that the dilapidated straw hat got by 
being uplifted and rooted under was retained until 
the next call altered the inclination; many hats were 
present, but none were erect and no two were canted 
just alike. We are speaking impartially of men, 
youths, and boys. And we are also speaking of these 
three estates when we say that every individual was 
either chewing natural leaf tobacco prepared on his 
own premises, or smoking the same in a corncob 
3 


MARK TWAIN 


pipe. Few of the men wore whiskers; none wore 
mustaches; some had a thick jungle of hair under 
the chin and hiding the throat—the only pattern 
recognized there as being the correct thing in 
whiskers; but no part of any individual’s face had 
seen a razor for a week. 

These neighbors stood a few moments looking at 
the mail-carrier reflectively while he talked; but 
fatigue soon began to show itself, and one after 
another they climbed up and occupied the top rail 
of the fence, hump-shouldered and grave, like a 
company of buzzards assembled for supper and 
listening for the death-rattle. Old Damrell said: 

““Tha hain’t no news "bout the jedge, hit ain’t 
likely ?’’ 

“‘Cain’t tell for sartain; some thinks he’s gwyne 
to be ’long toreckly, and some thinks ’e hain’t. 
Russ Mosely he tole ole Hanks he mought git to 
Obeds tomorrer or nex’ day he reckoned.” 

“Well, I wisht I knowed. I got a prime sow and 
pigs in the cote-house, and I hain’t got no place for 
to put ’em. If the jedge is a-gwyne to hold cote, 
I got to roust ’em out, I reckon. But tomorrer ’Il 
do, I ’spect.”’ 

The speaker bunched his thick lips together like 
the stem end of a tomato and shot a bumblebee dead 
that had lit on a weed seven feet away. One after 
another the several chewers expressed a charge of 
tobacco-juice and delivered it at the deceased with 
steady aim and faultless accuracy. 

‘‘What’s a-stirrin’, down *bout the Forks?” con- 
tinued Old Damrell. 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘Well, I dunno, skasely. Ole Drake Higgins he’s 
b’en down to Shelby las’ week. Tuck his crap 
down; couldn’t git shet o’ the most uv it; hit warn’t 
no time for to sell, he say, so he fotch it back ag’in, 
‘lowin’ to wait tell fall. Talks ’bout goin’ to Mo- 
zouri—lots uv ’em’s talkin’ that-away down thar, 
Ole Higgins say. Cain’t make a livin’ here no mo’, 
sich times as these. Si Higgins he’s b’en over to 
Kaintuck ’n’ married a high-toned gal thar, outen 
the fust families, an’ he’s come back to the Forks 
with jist a hell’s-mint o’ whoop-jamboree notions, 
folks say. He’s tuck an’ fixed up the ole house like 
they does in Kaintuck, he say, an’ tha’s b’en folks 
come cler from Turpentine for to see it. He’s tuck 
an’ gawmed it all over on the inside with plarsterin’.”’ 

‘“What’s plarsterin’?”’ 

“I dono. Hit’s what he calls it. Ole Mam 
Higgins, she tole me. She say she warn’t gwyne 
to hang out in no sich a dern hole like a hog. Says 
it’s mud, or some sich kind o’ nastness that sticks on 
’n’ kivers up everything. Plarsterin’, Si calls it.” 

This marvel was discussed at considerable length; 
and almost with animation. But presently there 
was a dog-fight over in the neighborhood of the 
blacksmith shop, and the visitors slid off their perch 
like so many turtles and strode to the battle-field 
with an interest bordering on eagerness. ‘The Squire 
remained, and read his letter. Then he sighed, and 
sat long in meditation. At intervals he said: 

‘“Missouri. Missouri. Well, well, well, every- 
thing is so uncertain.”’ 

At last he said: 


MARK TWAIN 


‘IT believe I’ll do it.—A man will just rot, here. 
My house, my yard, everything around me, in fact, 
shows that I am becoming one of these cattle—and 
I used to be thrifty in other times.” 

He was not more than thirty-five, but he had a 
worn look that made him seem older. He left the 
stile, entered that part of his house which was the 
store, traded a quart. of thick molasses for a coon- 
skin and a cake of beeswax to an old dame in linsey- 
woolsey, put his letter away, and went into the 
kitchen. His wife was there, constructing some 
dried-apple pies; a slovenly urchin of ten was dream- 
ing over a rude weather-vane of his own contriving; 
his small sister, close upon four years of age, was 
sopping cornbread in some gravy left in the bottom 
of a frying-pan and trying hard not to sop over a 
finger-mark that divided the pan through the middle 
—for the other side belonged to the brother, whose 
musings made him forget his stomach for the mo- 
ment; a negro woman was busy cooking at a vast fire- 
place. Shiftlessness and poverty reigned in the place. 

‘Nancy, I’ve made up my mind. The world is 
done with me, and perhaps I ought to be done with 
it. But no matter—I can wait. I am going to 
Missouri. I won’t stay in this dead country and 
decay with it. I’ve had it on my mind some time. 
I’m going to sell out here for whatever I can get, and 
buy a wagon and team and put you and the children 
iietieatig Stam 

“Anywhere that suits you, suits me, Si. And 
the children can’t be any worse off in Missouri than 
they are here, I reckon.”’ 

6 


THE*® GILDED @AGE 


Motioning his wife to a private conference in their 
own room, Hawkins said: ‘‘No, they’ll be better off. 
I’ve looked out for them, Nancy,’’ and his face 
lighted. ‘‘Do you see these papers? Well, they are 
evidence that I have taken up Seventy-five Thousand 
Acres of Land in this county—think what an enor- 
mous fortune it will be some day! Why, Nancy, 
enormous don’t express it—the word’s too tame! 
I tell you, Nancy—”’ 

‘For goodness sake, Si—’’ 

‘Wait, Nancy, wait—let me finish—I’ve been 
secretly boiling and fuming with this grand inspira- 
tion for weeks, and I must talk or Vl burst! I 
haven’t whispered to a soul—not a word—have had 
my countenance under lock and key, for fear it 
might drop something that would tell even these 
animals here how to discern the gold-mine that’s 
glaring under their noses. Now, all that is neces- 
sary to hold this land and keep it in the family is 
to pay the trifling taxes on it yearly—five or ten 
dollars—the whole tract would not sell for over a 
third of a cent an acre now, but some day people 
will be glad to get it for twenty dollars, fifty dollars, 
a hundred dollars an acre! What should you say 
to’’ [here he dropped his voice to a whisper and 
looked anxiously around to see that there were no 
eavesdroppers] ‘‘a thousand dollars an acre! 

‘‘Well you may open your eyes and stare! But 
it’s so. You and I may not see the day, but they'll 
see it. Mind I tell you, they’ll see it. Nancy, 
you’ve heard of steamboats, and maybe you believed 
in them—of course you did. You’ve heard these 

7 


MARK TWAIN 


cattle here scoff at them and call them lies and 
humbugs—but they’re not lies and humbugs, they’re 
a reality, and they’re going to be a more wonderful 
thing some day than they are now. They’re going 
to make a revolution in this world’s affairs that will 
make men dizzy tocontemplate. I’ve been watching 
—TI’ve been watching while some people slept, and I 
know what’s coming. 

‘‘Even you and I will see the day that steamboats 
will come up that little Turkey River to within 
twenty miles of this land of ours—and in high water 
they'll come right toit! And this is not all, Nancy— 
it isn’t even half! There’s a bigger wonder—the 
railroad! ‘These worms here have never even heard 
of it—and when they do they’ll not believe in it. 
But it’s another fact. Coaches that fly over the 
ground twenty miles an hour—heavens and earth, 
think of that, Nancy! Twenty miles an hour. It 
makes a man’s brain whirl. Some day, when you 
and [ are in our graves, there’ll be a railroad stretch- 
ing hundreds of miles—all the way down from the 
cities of the Northern states to New Orleans—and 
it’s got to run within thirty miles of this land— 
maybe even touch a corner of it. Well, do you know, 
they’ve quit burning wood in some places in the 
Eastern states? And what do you suppose they 
burn? Coal!’ [He bent over and whispered again:] 
‘“‘There’s whole worlds of tt on this land! You know 
that black stuff that crops out of the bank of the 
branch? well, that’s it. You’ve taken it for rocks; 
so has everybody here; and they’ve built little dams 
and such things with it. One man was going to 

8 


THE GILDED AGE 


build a chimney out of it. Nancy, I expect I turned 
as white asa sheet! Why, it might have caught fire 
and told everything. I showed him it was too 
crumbly. Then he was going to build it of copper 
ore—splendid yellow forty-per-cent ore! There’s 
fortunes upon fortunes of copper ore on our land! It 
scared me to death, the idea of this fool starting a 
smelting furnace in his house without knowing it, 
and getting his dull eyes opened. And then he was 
going to build it of zvon ore! There’s mountains of 
iron ore here, Nancy—whole mountains of it. I 
wouldn’t take any chances. I just stuck by him—I 
haunted him—TI never let him alone till he built it 
of mud and sticks like all the rest of the chimneys in 
this dismal country. Pine forests, wheat-land, corn- 
land, iron, copper, coal—wait till the railroads come, 
and the steamboats! We’ll never see the day, Nancy 
—never in the world—never, never, never, child. 
We've got to drag along, drag along, and eat crusts 
in toil and poverty, all hopeless and forlorn—but 
they'll ride in coaches, Nancy! They’ll live like the 
princes of the earth; they’ll be courted and wor- 
shiped; their names will be known from ocean to 
ocean! Ah, well-a-day! Will they ever come back 
here, on the railroad and the steamboat, and say 
‘This one little spot shall not be touched—this hovel 
shall be sacred—for here our father and our mother 
suffered for us, thought for us, laid the founda- 
tions of our future as solid as the hills!’” 

‘You are a great, good, noble soul, Si Hawkins, 
and I am an honored woman to be the wife of such 
a man’’—and the tears stood in her eyes when she 

9 


MARK TWAIN 


said it. ‘“‘We will go to Missouri. You are out of 
your place here, among these groping dumb creatures. 
We will find a higher place, where you can walk with 
your own kind, and be understood when you speak 
—not stared at as if you were talking some foreign 
tongue. I would go anywhere, anywhere in the wide 
world with you. I would rather my body should 
starve and die than your mind should hunger and 
wither away in this lonely land.”’ 

““Spoken like yourself, my child! But we’ll not 
starve, Nancy. Far from it. I have a letter from 
Beriah Sellers—just came this day. A letter that 
—ITll read you a line from it!”’ 

He flew out of the room. A shadow blurred the 
sunlight in Nancy’s face—there was uneasiness in 
it, and disappointment. <A procession of disturbing 
thoughts began to troop through her mind. Saying 
nothing aloud, she sat with her hands in her lap; 
now and then she clasped them, then unclasped 
them, then tapped the ends of the fingers together; 
sighed, nodded, smiled—occasionally paused, shook 
her head. This pantomime was the elocutionary 
expression of an unspoken soliloquy which had 
something of this shape: 

"I was afraid of it—was afraid of it. Trying to 
make our fortune in Virginia, Beriah Sellers nearly 
ruined us—and we had to settle in Kentucky and 
start over again. Trying to make our fortune in 
Kentucky, he crippled us again and we had to move 
here. Trying to make our fortune here, he brought 
us clear down to the ground, nearly. He’s an 
honest soul, and means the very best in the world, 

IO 


THE GILDED AGE 


but I’m afraid, I’m afraid he’s too flighty. He has 
splendid ideas, and he’ll divide his chances with his 
friends with a free hand, the good generous soul, 
but something does seem to always interfere and 
spoil everything. I never did think he was right 
well balanced. But I don’t blame my husband, for 
I do think that when that man gets his head full 
of a new notion, he can out-talk a machine. He'll 
make anybody believe in that notion that ’ll listen 
to him ten minutes—why, I do believe he would 
make a deaf-and-dumb man believe in it and get 
beside himself, if you only set him where he could 
see his eyes talk and watch his hands explain. What 
a head he has got! When he got up that idea there 
in Virginia of buying up whole loads of negroes in 
Delaware and Virginia and Tennessee, very quiet, 
having papers drawn to have them delivered at a 
place in Alabama and take them and pay for them, 
away yonder at a certain time, and then in the 
mean time get a law made stopping everybody from 
selling negroes to the South after a certain day—it 
was somehow that way—mercy how the man would 
have made money! Negroes would have gone up 
to four prices. But after he’d spent money and 
worked hard, and traveled hard, and had heaps of 
negroes all contracted for, and everything going 
along just right, he couldn’t get the laws passed 
and down the whole thing tumbled. And there in 
Kentucky, when he raked up that old numskull that 
had been inventing away at a perpetual-motion 
machine for twenty-two years, and Beriah Sellers 
saw at a glance where just one more little cogwheel 
It 


MARK TWAIN 


would settle the business, why I could see it as plain 
as day when he came in wild at midnight and ham- 
mered us out of bed and told the whole thing in a 
whisper with the doors bolted and the candle in an 
empty barrel. Oceans of money in it—anybody 
could see that. But it did cost a deal to buy the old 
numskull out—and then when they put the new 
cogwheel in they’d overlooked something somewhere 
and it wasn’t any use—the troublesome thing 
wouldn’t go. That notion he got up here did look 
as handy as anything in the world; and how him and 
Si did sit up nights working at it with the curtains 
down and me watching to see if any neighbors were 
about. The man did honestly believe there was a 
fortune in that black gummy oil that stews out of 
the bank Si says is coal; and he refined it himself 
till it was like water, nearly, and it did burn, there’s 
no two ways about that; and I reckon he’d have been 
all right in Cincinnati with his lamp that he got 
made, that time he got a house full of rich speculators 
to see him exhibit, only in the middle of his speech it 
let go and almost blew the heads off the whole crowd. 
I haven’t got over grieving for the money that cost, 
yet. JI am sorry enough Beriah Sellers is in Mis- 
souri now, but I was glad when he went. JI wonder 
what his letter says. But of course it’s cheerful; 
he’s never downhearted—never had any trouble in 
his life—didn’t know it if he had. It’s always sun- 
rise with that man, and fine and blazing, at that— 
never gets noon, though—leaves off and rises again. 
Nobody can help liking the creature, he means so 
well—but I do dread to come across him again; he’s 
I2 


THE GILDED AGE 


bound to set us all crazy, of course. Well, there 
goes old Widow Hopkins—it always takes her a 
week to buy a spool of thread and trade a hank of 
yarn. Maybe $1 can come with the letter, now.”’ 

And he did: 

“Widow Hopkins kept me—I haven’t any pa- 
tience with such tedious people. Now listen, Nancy 
—just listen at this: 

“Come right along to Missouri! Don’t wait and worry 
about a good price, but sell out for whatever you can get, and 
come along, or you might be too late. Throw away your traps, 
if necessary, and come empty-handed. You’ll never regret it. 
It’s the grandest country—the loveliest land—the purest atmos- 
phere—I can’t describe it; no pen can do it justice. And it’s 
filling up every day—people coming from everywhere. I’ve got 
the biggest scheme on earth—and J’ll take you in; I’ll take in 
every friend I’ve got that’s ever stood by me, for there’s enough 
for all, and to spare. Mum’s the word—don’t whisper—keep 
yourself to yourself. You'll see! Come!—rush!—hurry!— 
don’t wait for anything! 

“It’s the same old boy, Nancy, just the same 
old boy—ain’t he?”’ 

“Yes, I think there’s a little of the old sound about 
his voice yet. I suppose you—you'll still go, Si?” 

“Go! Well, I should think so, Nancy. It’s all 
a chance, of course, and chances haven’t been kind 
to us, I’ll admit—but whatever comes, old wife, 
they’re provided for. Thank God for that!’ 

‘‘Amen,’’ came low and earnestly. 

And with an activity and a suddenness that bewil- 
dered Obedstown and almost took its breath away, the 
Hawkinses hurried through with their arrangements 
in four short months and flitted out into the great mys- 
terious blank that lay beyond the Knobs of Tennessee. 


13 


CHAPTER II 
SQUIRE HAWKINS ADOPTS CLAY 


COE TO:MmHN: ACHLPES RA: AANCH: OAV: 
LAOtTPow: AAD, A: CIO FP: Oi t 2 OLLI: 
DEZNLZPI : N00: MALI: O4, F4, B:: 


OWARD the close of the third day’s journey 

the wayfarers were just beginning to think of 
camping, when they came upon a log cabin in the 
woods. Hawkins drew rein and entered the yard. 
A boy about ten years old was sitting in the cabin 
door with his face bowed in his hands. Hawkins 
approached, expecting his footfall to attract atten- 
tion, but it did not. He halted a moment, and then 
said: 

““Come, come, little chap, you mustn’t be going 
to sleep before sundown.” 

With a tired expression the small face came up 
out of the hands—a face down which tears were 
flowing. 

‘“‘Ah, I’m sorry I spoke so, my boy. Tell me, is 
anything the matter?’’ 

The boy signified with a scarcely perceptible 
gesture that the trouble was in the house, and made 
room for Hawkins to pass. Then he put his face 
in his hands again and rocked himself about as one 

I4 


THE GILDED TAGE 


suffering a grief that is too deep to find help in moan 
or groan or outcry. Hawkins stepped within. It 
was a poverty-stricken place. Six or eight middle- 
aged country people of both sexes were grouped 
about an object in the middle of the room; they were 
noiselessly busy and they talked in whispers when 
they spoke. Hawkins uncovered and approached. 
A: coffin stood upon two backless chairs. These 
neighbors had just finished disposing the body of a 
woman in it—a woman with a care-worn, gentle face 
that had more the look of sleep about it than of 
death. An old lady motioned toward the door and 
said to Hawkins in a whisper: 

‘‘His mother, po’ thing. Died of the fever, last 
night. Tha warn’t no sich thing as saving of her. 
But it’s better for her—better for her. Husband 
and the other two children died in the spring, and 
she hain’t ever hilt up her head sence. She jest 
went around broken-hearted like, and never took no 
intrust in anything but Clay—that’s the boy thar. 
She jest worshiped Clay—and Clay he worshiped 
her. They didn’t ’pear to live at all, only when 
they was together, looking at each other, loving one 
another. She’s b’en sick three weeks; and if you 
believe me that child has worked, and kep’ the run 
of the med’cin, and the times of giving it, and sot 
up nights and nussed her, and tried to keep up her 
sperits, the same as a grown-up person. And last 
night when she kep’ a-sinking and sinking, and 
turned away her head and didn’t know him no mo’, 
it was fitten to make a body’s heart break to see him 
climb onto the bed and lay his cheek ag’in hern and 

15 


MARK TWAIN 


call her so pitiful and she not answer. But bymeby 
she roused up like, and looked around wild, and then 
she see him, and she made a great cry and snatched 
him to her breast and hilt him close and kissed him 
over and over ag’in; but it took the last po’ strength 
she had, and so her eyelids begin to close down, and 
her arms sort 0’ drooped away and then we see she 
was gone, po’ creetur. And Clay, he—oh, the po’ 
motherless thing—I cain’t talk about it—I cain’t 
bear to talk about it.” 

Clay had disappeared from the door; but he came 
in, now, and the neighbors reverently fell apart and 
made way for him. He leaned upon the open coffin 
and let his tears course silently. Then he put out 
his small hand and smoothed the hair and stroked 
the dead face lovingly. After a bit he brought his 
other hand up from behind him and laid three or 
four fresh wild flowers upon the breast, bent over and 
kissed the unresponsive lips time and time again, and 
then turned away and went out of the house without 
looking at any of the company. The old lady said 
to Hawkins: 

‘She always ioved that kind o’ flowers. He 
fetched ’em for her every morning, and she always 
kissed him. They was from away north somers— 
she kep’ school when she fust come. Goodness 
knows what’s to become o’ that po’ boy. No 
father, no mother, no kinfolks of no kind. Nobody 
to go to, nobody that k’yers for him—and all of us 
is so put to it for to get along and families so large.” 

Hawkins understood. All eyes were turned in- 
quiringly upon him. He said: 

16 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Friends, I am not very well provided for myself, 
but still I would not turn my back on a homeless 
orphan. If he will go with me I will give him a 
home, and loving regard—I will do for him as I 
would have another do for a child of my own in 
misfortine.”’ 

One after another the people stepped forward and 
wrung the stranger’s hand with cordial good will, 
and their eyes looked all that their hands could not 
express or their lips speak. 

‘Said like a true man,” said one. 

‘You was a stranger to me a minute ago, but you 
ain’t now,’ said another. 

“It’s bread cast upon the waters—it ‘Il return 
after many days,’’ said the old lady whom we have 
heard speak before. 

“You got to camp in my house as long as you 
hang out here,” said one. ‘“‘If tha hain’t room for 
you and yourn my tribe ‘ll turn out and camp in the 
hayloft.”’ 

A few minutes afterward, while the preparations 
for the funeral were being concluded, Mr. Hawkins 
arrived at his wagon leading his little waif by the 
hand, and told his wife all that had happened, and 
asked her if he had done right in giving to her and 
to himself this new care. She said: 

‘“‘Tf you’ve done wrong, Si Hawkins, it’s a wrong 
that will shine brighter at the judgment day than the 
rights that many a man has done before you. And 
there isn’t any compliment you can pay me equal to 
doing a thing like this and finishing it up, just taking 
it for granted that I'll be willing to it. Willing? 

17 


MARK TWAIN 


Come to me, you poor motherless boy, and let me 
take your grief and help you carry it.” 


When the child awoke in the morning, it was as if 
from a troubled dream. But slowly the confusion 
in his mind took form, and he remembered his great 
loss; the beloved form in the coffin; his talk with a 
generous stranger who offered him a home; the 
funeral, where the stranger’s wife held him by the 
hand at the grave, and cried with him and comforted 
him; and he remembered how this new mother 
tucked him in his bed in the neighboring farmhouse, 
and coaxed him to talk about his troubles, and then 
heard him say his prayers and kissed him good 
night, and left him with the soreness in his heart 
almost healed and his bruised spirit at rest. 

And now the new mother came again, and helped 
him to dress, and combed his hair, and drew his 
mind away by degrees from the dismal yesterday, 
by telling him about the wonderful journey he was 
going to take and the strange things he was going to 
see. And after breakfast they two went alone to 
the grave, and his heart went out to his new friend 
and his untaught eloquence poured the praises of 
his buried idol into her ears without let or hindrance. 
Together they planted roses by the headboard and 
strewed wild flowers upon the grave; and then to- 
gether they went away, hand in hand, and left the 
dead to the long sleep that heals all heartaches and 
ends all sorrows. 


CHAPTER III 
UNCLE DANIEL’S FIRST SIGHT OF A STEAMBOAT 


Babillebabou! (disoit-il) voici pis qu’antan. Fuyons! C’est, 
par la mort boeuf! Leviathan, descript par le noble prophete 
Moses en la vie du sainct home Job. I] nous avallera tous, 
comme pilules.s . . . Voy le cy. O que tu es horrible et 
abhominable! . . . Ho ho! Diable, Satanas, Leviathan! 
Je ne te peux veoir, tant tu es ideux et detestable. 

Rabelats. Pantagruel, b. iv, c. 33. 


HATEVER the lagging dragging journey may 

have been to the rest of the emigrants, it was 
a wonder and delight to the children, a world of 
enchantment; and they believed it to be peopled 
with the mysterious dwarfs and giants and goblins 
that figured in the tales the negro slaves were in the 
habit of telling them nightly by the shuddering light 
of the kitchen fire. 

At the end of nearly a week of travel, the party 
went into camp near a shabby village which was 
caving, house by house, into the hungry Mississippi. 
The river astonished the children beyond measure. 
Its mile-breadth of water seemed an ocean to them, 
in the shadowy twilight, and the vague riband of 
trees on the further shore, the verge of a continent 
which surely none but they had ever seen before. 

“Uncle Dan’l” (colored), aged forty; his wife, 

19 


MARK TWAIN 


“Aunt Jinny,” aged thirty, ‘“Young Miss’? Emily 
Hawkins, ‘‘ Young Mars’’ Washington Hawkins, and 
“Young Mars” Clay, the new member of the family, 
ranged themselves on a log, after supper, and con- 
templated the marvelous river and discussed it. 
The moon rose and sailed aloft through a maze of 
shredded cloud-wreaths; the somber river just per- 
ceptibly brightened under the veiled light; a deep 
silence pervaded the air and was emphasized, at 
intervals, rather than broken, by the hooting of an 
owl, the baying of a dog, or the muffled crash of a 
caving bank in the distance. 

The little company assembled on the log were all 
children (at least in simplicity and broad and com- 
prehensive ignorance), and the remarks they made 
about the river were in keeping with the character; 
and so awed were they by the grandeur and the 
solemnity of the scene before them, and by their 
belief that the air was filled with invisible spirits 
and that the faint zephyrs were caused by their pass- 
ing wings, that all their talk took to itself a tinge of 
the supernatural, and their voices were subdued to 
a low and reverent tone. Suddenly, Uncle Dan’l 
exclaimed : 

**Chil’en, dah’s sumfin a-comin’!’’ 

All crowded close together and every heart beat 
faster. Uncle Dan’l pointed down the river with his 
bony finger. 

A deep coughing sound troubled the stillness, 
way toward a wooded cape that jutted into the 
stream a mile distant. All in an instant a fierce 
eye of fire shot out from behind the cape and sent a 

20 


ioe GILDED AGE 


long brilliant pathway quivering athwart the dusky 
water. The coughing grew louder and louder, the 
glaring eye grew larger and still larger, glared wilder 
and still wilder. A huge shape developed itself out 
of the gloom, and from its tall duplicate horns dense 
volumes of smoke, starred and spangled with sparks, 
poured out and went tumbling away into the farther 
darkness. Nearer and nearer the thing came, till its 
long sides began to glow with spots of light which 
mirrored themselves in the river and attended the 
monster like a torchlight procession. 

“What is it! Oh, what zs it, Uncle Dan’l!’ 

With deep solemnity the answer came: 

“It’s de Almighty! Git down on you’ knees!”’ 

It was not necessary to say it twice. They were 
all kneeling in a moment. And then while the 
mysterious coughing rose stronger and stronger, and 
the threatening glare reached farther and wider, the 
negro’s voice lifted up its supplications: 

“‘O Lord, we’s ben mighty wicked, an’ we knows 
dat we ’zerve to go to de bad place, but good Lord, 
deah Lord, we ain’t ready yit, we ain’t ready—let 
dese po’ chil’en hab one mo’ chance, jes’ one mo’ 
chance. Take de ole niggah if you’s got to hab 
somebody. Good Lord, good deah Lord, we don’t 
know whah you’s a-gwyne to, we don’t know who 
you’s got yo’ eye on, but we knows by de way 
you’s a-comin’, we knows by de way you’s a-tiltin’ 
along in yo’ charyot o’ fiah dat some po’ sinner’s 
a-gwyne to ketch it. But, good Lord, dese chil’en 
don’t b’long heah, dey’s f’m Obedstown whah dey 
don’t know nuffin, an’ you knows, yo’ own sef, dat 

20 


MARK TWAIN 


dey ain’t ’sponsible. An’ deah Lord, good Lord, 
it ain’t like yo’ mercy, it ain’t like yo’ pity, it ain’t 
like yo’ long-sufferin’ lovin’-kindness for to take dis 
kind o’ ’vantage o’ sich chil’en as dese is when 
dey’s so many ornery grown folks chuck full o’ 
cussedness dat wants roastin’ down dah. Oh, Lord, 
spah de little chil’en, don’t tar de little chil’en away 
f’m dey frens, jes’ let ’em off jes’ dis once, and 
take it out’n de ole niggah. Herau I 7s, Lorp, 
HEAH [1z! De ole niggah’s ready, Lord, de ole—” 

The flaming and churning steamer was right. 
abreast the party, and not twenty steps away. The 
awful thunder of a mud-valve suddenly burst forth, 
drowning the prayer, and as suddenly Uncle Dan’l 
snatched a child under each arm and scoured into 
the woods with the rest of the pack at his heels. 
And then, ashamed of himself, he halted in the deep 
darkness and shouted (but rather feebly): 

‘““Heah I is, Lord, heah I is!’’ 

There was a moment of throbbing suspense, and 
then, to the surprise and the comfort of the party, 
it was plain that the august presence had gone by, 
for its dreadful noises were receding. Uncle Dan’l 
headed a cautious reconnaissance in the direction of 
the log. Sure enough ‘‘the Lord”’ was just turning 
a point a short distance up the river, and while they 
looked the lights winked out and the coughing dimin- 
ished by degrees and presently ceased altogether. 

““H’wsh! Well now dey’s some folks say dey 
ain’t no ’ficiency in prah. Dis chile would like to 
know whah we’d’a’ ben now if it warn’t fo’ dat prah? 
Dat’s it. Dat’s it!” 

22 


THe GILDED AGE 


“Uncle Dan’l, do you reckon it was the prayer 
that saved us?”’ said Clay. 

**Does I reckon? Don’t I know it! Whah was 
yo’ eyes? Warn’t de Lord jes’ a-comin’ chow! 
chow! cHow! an’ a-goin’ on turrible—an’ do de 
Lord carry on dat way ’dout dey’s sumfin don’t suit 
him? An’ warn’t he a-lookin’ right at dis gang 
heah, an’ warn’t he jes’ a-reachin’ for ’em? An’ 
d’you spec’ he gwyne to let ’em off ’dout some- 
body ast him to doit? No indeedy!”’ 

““Do you reckon he saw us, Uncle Dan’1?”’ 

‘‘De law sakes, chile, didn’t I see him a-lookin’ 
aps?’ 

‘‘Did you feel scared, Uncle Dan’l?” 

‘‘No sah! When a man is 'gaged in prah, he 
ain’t ’fraid o’ nuffin—dey can’t nuffin tetch him.” 

‘Well, what did you run for?” 

‘Well, I1—I—Mars Clay, when a man is under 
de influence ob de sperit, he dono what he’s ’bout 
—no sah; dat man dono what he’s ’bout. You 
mout take an’ tah de head off’n dat man an’ he 
wouldn’t scasely fine it out. Dah’s de Hebrew 
chil’en dat went frough de fiah; dey was burnt con- 
sidable—ob coase dey was; but dey didn’t know 
nuffin bout it—heal right up ag’in; if dey’d ben 
gals dey’d missed dey long haah [hair], maybe, but 
dey wouldn’t felt de burn.” 

‘“‘T don’t know but what they were girls. I think 
they were.”’ 

‘‘Now, Mars Clay, you knows better’n dat. 
Sometimes a body can’t tell whedder you’s a-sayin’ 
what you means or whedder you’s a-sayin’ what 

23 


MARK TWAIN 


you don’t mean, ‘case you says ’em bofe de same 
way.” 

‘‘But how should £ know whether they were boys 
or girls?” 

‘Goodness sakes, Mars Clay, don’t de Good 
Book say? ‘Sides, don’t it call ’em de he-brew 
chil’en? If dey was gals wouldn’t dey be de she- 
brew chil’en? Some people dat kin read don’t 
‘pear to take no notice when dey do read.”’ 

‘Well, Uncle Dan’l, I think that— My! here 
comes another one up the river! There can’t be 
two!”’ 

‘““We gone dis time—we done gone dis time, 
sho’! Dey ain’t two, Mars Clay—dat’s de same 
one. De Lord kin ’pear eberywhah in a second. 
Goodness, how de fiah and de smoke do belch up! 
Dat mean business, honey. He comin’ now like he 
fo’got sumfin. Come ’long, chil’en, time you’s 
gwyne to roos’. Go ’long wid you—ole Uncle 
Daniel gwyne out in de woods to rastle in prah—de 
ole niggah gwyne to do what he kin to sabe you 
ag’in.”’ 

He did go to the woods and pray; but he went 
so far that he doubted, himself, if the Lord heard 
him when He went by. 


CHAPTER IV 
SQUIRE HAWKINS ON A MISSISSIPPI STEAMBOAT 


—Seventhly, Before his Voyage, He should make his peace 
with God, satisfie his Creditors if he be in debt; Pray earnestly 
to God to prosper him in his Voyage, and to keep him from 
danger, and, if he be sui juris, he should make his last will, and 
wisely order all his affairs, since many that go far abroad, 
return not home. (This good and Christian Counsel is given by 
Martinus Zeilerus in his Apodemical Canons before his Itinerary 


of Spain and Portugal.) 
Leigh’s Diatribe of Travel, p. 7. 


ARLY in the morning Squire Hawkins took 
passage in a small steamboat, with his family 
and his two slaves, and presently the bell rang, the 
stage-plank was hauled in, and the vessel proceeded 
up the river. The children and the slaves were not 
much more at ease after finding out that this mon- 
ster was a creature of human contrivance than they 
were the night before when they thought it the Lord 
of heaven and earth. They started, in fright, every 
time the gauge-cocks sent out an angry hiss, and 
they quaked from head to foot when the mud-valves 
thundered. The shivering of the boat under the 
beating of the wheels was sheer misery to them. © 
But of course familiarity with these things soon 
took away their terrors, and then the voyage at 
once became a glorious adventure, a royal progress 
25 


MARK TWAIN 


through the very heart and home of romance, a 
realization of their rosiest wonder-dreams. They 
sat by the hour in the shade of the pilot-house on the 
hurricane-deck and looked out over the curving 
expanses of the river sparkling in the sunlight. 
Sometimes the boat fought the midstream current, 
with a verdant world on either hand, and remote 
from both; sometimes she closed in under a point, 
where the dead water and the helping eddies were, 
and shaved the bank so closely that the decks were 
swept by the jungle of overhanging willows and 
littered with a spoil of leaves; departing from these 
““points”’ she regularly crossed the river every five 
miles, avoiding the ‘‘bight”’ of the great bends and 
thus escaping the strong current; sometimes she 
went out and skirted a high ‘‘bluff”’ sand-bar in the 
middle of the stream, and occasionally followed it 
up a little too far and touched upon the shoal water 
at its head—and then the intelligent craft refused to 
run herself aground, but ‘‘smelt’’ the bar, and 
straightway the foamy streak that streamed away 
from her bows vanished, a great foamless wave 
rolled forward and passed her under way, and in this 
instant she leaned far over on her side, shied from 
the bar and fled square away from the danger like a 
frightened thing—and the pilot was lucky if he 
managed to ‘‘straighten her up”’ before she drove 
her nose into the opposite bank; sometimes she 
approached a solid wall of tall trees as if she meant 
to break through it, but all of a sudden a little crack 
would open just enough to admit her, and away she 
would go plowing through the ‘‘chute”’ with just 
26 


THe -GELDED AGE 


barely room enough between the island on one side 
and the mainland on the other; in this sluggish 
water she seemed to go like a race-horse; now and 
then small log cabins appeared in little clearings, 
with the never-failing frowsy women and girls in 
soiled and faded linsey-woolsey leaning in the doors 
or against wood-piles and rail fences, gazing sleepily 
at the passing show; sometimes she found shoal 
water, going out at the head of those ‘‘chutes’’ or 
crossing the river, and then a deck-hand stood on 
the bow and hove the lead, while the boat slowed 
down and moved cautiously; sornetimes she stopped 
a moment at a landing and took on some freight or 
a passenger while a crowd of slouchy white men 
and negroes stood on the bank and looked sleepily 
on with their hands in their pantaloons pockets—of 
course—for they never took them out except to 
stretch, and when they did this they squirmed 
about and reached their fists up into the air and 
lifted themselves on tiptoe in an ecstasy of enjoy- 
ment. 

When the sun went down it turned all the broad 
river to a national banner laid in gleaming bars of 
gold and purple and crimson; and in time these 
glories faded out in the twilight and left the fairy 
archipelagoes reflecting their fringing foliage in the 
steely mirror of the stream. 

At night the boat forged on through the deep 
solitudes of the river, hardly ever discovering a light 
to testify to a human presence—mile after mile and 
league after league the vast bends were guarded by 
unbroken walls of forest, that had never been dis- 

27 


MARK TWAIN 


turbed by the voice or the footfall of a man or felt 
the edge of his sacrilegious ax. 

An hour after supper the moon came up, and 
Clay and Washington ascended to the hurricane-deck 
to revel again in their new realm of enchantment. 
They ran races up and down the deck; climbed 
about the bell; made friends with the passenger- 
dogs chained under the life-boat ; tried to make friends 
with a passenger-bear fastened to the verge-staff, 
but were not encouraged; “‘skinned the cat’’ on the 
hog-chains; in a word, exhausted the amusement 
possibilities of the deck. Then they looked wist- 
fully up at the pilot-house, and finally, little by little, 
Clay ventured up there, followed diffidently by 
Washington. The pilot turned presently to ‘‘get his 
stern-marks,’’ saw the lads and invited them in. 
Now their happiness was complete. This cozy little 
house, built entirely of glass and commanding a 
marvelous prospect in every direction, was a ma- 
gician’s throne to them, and their enjoyment of the 
place was simply boundless. 

They sat them down on a high bench and looked 
miles ahead and saw the wooded capes fold back and 
reveal the bends beyond; and they looked miles to 
the rear and saw the silvery highway diminish its 
breadth by degrees and close itself together in the 
distance. Presently the pilot said: 

‘‘By George, yonder comes the Amaranth!” 

A spark appeared, close to the water, several 
miles down the river. The pilot took his glass and 
looked at it steadily for a moment, and said, chiefly 
to himself: 

28 


THE GILDED AGE 


“Tt can’t be the Blue Wing. She couldn’t pick us 
up this way. It’s the Amaranth, sure.” 

He bent over a speaking-tube and said: 

‘“Who’s on watch down there?’’ 

A hollow, unhuman voice rumbled up through the 
tube in answer: 

“Iam. Second engineer.”’ 

‘Good! You want to stir your stumps, now, 
Harry—the Amaranth’s just turned the point—and 
she’s just a-humping herself, too!”’ 

The pilot took hold of a rope that stretched out 
forward, jerked it twice, and two mellow strokes of 
the big bell responded. A voice out on the deck 
shouted: 

‘“‘Stand by, down there, with that labboard lead!”’ 

‘‘No, I don’t want the lead,” said the pilot, ‘‘I 
want you. Roust out the old man—tell him the 
Amaranth’s coming. And go and call Jim—tell 
him.”’ 

‘‘ Aye-aye, sir!’ 

The ‘‘old man” was the captain—he is always 
called so, on steamboats and ships; “‘Jim”’ was the 
other pilot. Within two minutes both of these men 
were flying up the pilot-house stairway, three steps 
at a jump. Jim was in his shirt-sleeves, with his 
coat and vest on his arm. He said: 

‘“‘T was just turning in. Where’s the glass?” 

He took it and looked: 

‘‘Don’t appear to be any night hawk on the jack- 
staff—it’s the Amaranth, dead sure!’ 

The captain took a good long look, and only said: 

**Damnation!’’ 

29 


MARK TWAIN 


George Davis, the pilot on watch, shouted to the 
night watchman on deck: 

‘“How’s she loaded ?”’ 

‘“Two inches by the head, sir.”’ 

‘’Tain’t enough!’’ 

The captain shouted, now: 

‘‘Call the mate. Tell him to call all hands and 
get a lot of that sugar forrard—put her ten inches 
by the head. Lively, now!” 

‘‘Aye-aye, sir!” 

A riot of shouting and trampling floated up from 
below, presently, and the uneasy steering of the boat 
soon showed that she was getting “‘down by the 
head.”’ 

The three men in the pilot-house began to talk in 
short, sharp sentences, low and earnestly. As their 
excitement rose, their voices went down. As fast as 
one of them put down the spy-glass another took it 
up—but always with a studied air of calmness. 
Each time the verdict was: 

‘‘She’s a-gaining!”’ 

The captain spoke through the tube: 

‘‘What steam are you carrying?” 

‘‘A hundred and forty-two, sir! But she’s getting 
hotter and hotter all the time.” 

The boat was straining and groaning and quivering 
like a monster in pain. Both pilots were at work 
now, one on each side of the wheel, with their coats 
and vests off, their bosoms and collars wide open, 
and the perspiration flowing down their faces. They 
were holding the boat so close to the shore that the 
willows swept the guards almost from stem to stern. 

30 


THE GILDED AGE 


“Stand by!’’ whispered George. 

“All ready!’ said Jim, under his breath. 

‘“‘Let her come!’’ 

The boat sprang away from the bank like a deer, 
and darted in a long diagonal toward the other 
shore. She closed in again and thrashed her fierce 
way along the willows as before. The captain put 
down the glass: 

“Lord, how she walks up on us! I do hate to 
be beat!’ 

‘“‘Jim,”’ said George, looking straight ahead, 
watching the slightest yawing of the boat and 
promptly meeting it with the wheel, ‘‘how’ll it do 
to try Murderer’s Chute?” 

“Well, it’s—it’s taking chances. How was the 
cottonwood stump on the false point below Board- 
man’s Island this morning?” 

“Water just touching the roots.” 

“Well, it’s pretty close work. That gives six 
feet scant in the head of Murderer’s Chute. We 
can just barely rub through if we hit it exactly right. 
But it’s worth trying. She don’t dare tackle it!’’— 
meaning the Amaranth. 

In another instant the Boreas plunged into what 
seemed a crooked creek, and the Amaranth’s ap- 
proaching lights were shut out ina moment. Nota 
whisper was uttered, now, but the three men stared 
ahead into the shadows and two of them spun the 
wheel back and forth with anxious watchfulness 
while the steamer tore along. The chute seemed to 
come to an end every fifty yards, but always opened 
out in time. Now the head of it was at hand. 

31 


MARK TWAIN 


George tapped the big bell three times, two leads- 
men sprang to their posts, and in a moment their 
weird cries rose on the night air and were caught 
up and repeated by two men on the upper deck: 

‘“No-o bottom!” 

‘“De-e-p four!”’ 

“Half three!’’ 

‘‘Quarter three!’’ 

‘“Mark under wa-a-ter three!”’ 

“Half twain!” 

“Quarter twain !—” 

Davis pulled a couple of ropes—there was a jing- 
ling of small bells far below, the boat’s speed slack- 
ened, and the pent steam began to whistle and the 
gauge-cocks to scream. 

“By the mark twain!’’ 

““Quar-ter-her-er-less twain!” 

“Eight and a half!’ 

“Eight feet!’ 

““Seven-ana-half!—” 

Another jingling of little bells and the wheels 
ceased turning altogether. The whistling of the 
steam was something frightful, now—it almost 
drowned all other noises. 

“Stand by to meet her!’’ 

George had the wheel hard down and was stand- 
ing on a spoke. 

‘All ready !’’ 

The boat hesitated—seemed to hold her breath, 
as did the captain and pilots—and then she began 
to fall away to starboard and every eye lighted: 

‘‘Now then!—meet her! meet her! Snatch her!’ 

32 


THE GILDED AGE 


The wheel flew to port so fast that the spokes 
blended into a spider-web—the swing of the boat 
subsided—she steadied herself— 

*‘Seven feet!’’ 

‘“‘Sev—six and a half!” 

“Six feet! Six f—”’ 

Bang! She hit the bottom! George shouted 
through the tube: 

“Spread her wide open! Whale it at her!’ 

Pow—wow—chow! The escape-pipes belched 
snowy pillars of steam aloft, the boat ground and 
surged and trembled—and slid over into— 

**M-a-r-k twain!” 

‘“Quarter-her—”’ 

‘‘Tap! tap! tap!” (to signify ‘‘Lay in the leads.’’) 

And away she went, flying up the willow shore, 
with the whole silver sea of the Mississippi stretching 
abroad on every hand. 

No Amaranth in sight! 

‘‘Ha-ha, boys, we took a couple of tricks that 
time!’’ said the captain. 

And just at that moment a red glare appeared in 
the head of the chute and the Amaranth came spring- 
ing after them! 

“Well, I swear!’ 

‘Jim, what zs the meaning of that?” 

‘“‘T’ll tell you what’s the meaning of it. That hail 
we had at Napoleon was Wash Hastings, wanting to 
come to Cairo—and we didn’t stop. He’s in that 
pilot-house, now, showing those mud-turtles how to 
hunt for easy water.’ 

‘“‘That’s it! I thought it wasn’t any slouch that 

33 


MARK TWAIN 


was running that middle bar in Hog-eye Bend. If 
it’s Wash Hastings—well, what he don’t know about 
the river ain’t worth knowing—a regular gold-leaf, 
kid-glove, diamond-breastpin pilot Wash Hastings is. | 
We won’t take any tricks off of him, old man!’’ 

‘*T wish I’d a-stopped for him, that’s all.” 

The Amaranth was within three hundred yards of 
the Boreas, and still gaining. The ‘“‘old man” spoke 
through the tube: 

‘What is she carrying now?” 

“‘A hundred and sixty-five, sir!’’ 

‘“How’s your wood?”’ 

‘Pine all out—cypress half gone—eating up cot- 
tonwood like pie!’ 

‘Break into that rosin on the main deck—pile it 
in, the boat can pay for it!’ 

Soon the boat was plunging and quivering and 
screaming more madly than ever. But the Ama- 
ranth’s head was almost abreast the Boreas’s stern: 

‘‘How’s your steam, now, Harry?” 

‘“‘Hundred and eighty-two, sir!’ 

““Break up the casks of bacon in the forrard hold! 
Pile it in! Levy on that turpentine in the fantail— 
drench every stick of wood with it!’ 

The boat was a moving earthquake by this time: 

‘““How is she now?”’ 

‘“‘A hundred and ninety-six and still a-swelling!— 
water. below the middle gauge-cocks!—carrying every 
pound she can stand !—nigger roosting on the safety- 
valve!” 

“Good! How’s your draft?’’ 

“Bully! Every time a nigger heaves a stick of 

34 


ie Vali AGE 


wood into the furnace he goes out the chimney with 
‘ysl 

The Amaranth drew steadily up till her jack-staff 
breasted the Boreas’s wheelhouse—climbed along 
inch by inch till her chimneys breasted it—crept 
along further and further till the boats were wheel 
to wheel—and then they closed up with a heavy 
jolt and locked together tight and fast in the middle 
of the big river under the flooding moonlight! A 
roar and a hurrah went up from the crowded decks 
of both steamers—all hands rushed to the guards 
to look and shout and gesticulate—the weight 
careened the vessels over toward each other— 
officers flew hither and thither cursing and storming, 
trying to drive the people amidships—both captains 
were leaning over their railings shaking their fists, 
swearing and threatening—black volumes of smoke 
rolled up and canopied the scene, delivering a rain 
of sparks upon the vessels—two pistol-shots rang 
out, and both captains dodged unhurt and the packed 
masses of passengers surged back and fell apart 
while the shrieks of women and children soared 
above the intolerable din— 

And then there was a booming roar, a thundering 
crash, and the riddled Amaranth dropped loose 
from her hold and drifted helplessly away! 

Instantly the fire-doors of the Boreas were thrown 
open and the men began dashing buckets of water 
into the furnaces—for it would have been death and 
destruction to stop the engines with such a head of 
steam on. 

As soon as possible the Boreas dropped down to 

35 


MARK TWAIN 


the floating wreck and took off the dead, the 
wounded, and the unhurt—at least all that could be 
got at, for the whole forward half of the boat was a 
shapeless ruin, with the great chimneys lying crossed 
on top of it, and underneath were a dozen victims 
imprisoned alive and wailing for help. While men 
with axes worked with might and main to free these 
poor fellows, the Boreas’s boats went about, picking 
up stragglers from the river. 

And now a new horror presented itself. The 
wreck took fire from the dismantled furnaces! 
Never did men work with a heartier will than did 
those stalwart braves with the axes. But it was of 
no use. The fire ate its way steadily, despising the 
bucket brigade that fought it. It scorched the 
clothes, it singed the hair of the axmen—it drove 
them back, foor by foot—inch by inch—they 
wavered, struck a final blow in the teeth of the 
enemy, and surrendered. And as they fell back 
they heard prisoned voices saying: 

‘‘Don’t leave us! Don’t desert us! Don’t, don’t 
do it!”’ 

And one poor fellow said: 

‘‘T am Henry Worley, striker of the Amaranth! 
My mother lives in St. Louis. Tell her a lie for a 
poor devil’s sake, please. Say I was killed in an 
instant and never knew what hurt me—though God 
knows I’ve neither scratch nor bruise this moment! 
It’s hard to burn up in a coop like this with the 
whole wide world so near. Good-by, boys—we’ve 
all got to come to it at last, anyway!’ 

The Boreas stood away out of danger, and the 

36 


THE GILDED AGE 


ruined steamer went drifting down the stream, an 
island of wreathing and climbing flame that vomited 
clouds of smoke from time to time, and glared more 
fiercely and sent its luminous tongues higher and 
higher after each emission. A shriek at intervals 
told of a captive that had met his doom. The wreck 
lodged upon a sand-bar, and when the Boreas turned 
the next point on her upward journey it was still 
burning with scarcely abated fury. 

When the boys came down into the main saloon 
of the Boreas, they saw a pitiful sight and heard a 
world of pitiful sounds. Eleven poor creatures lay 
dead and forty more lay moaning, or pleading or 
screaming, while a score of Good Samaritans moved 
among them doing what they could to relieve their 
sufferings; bathing their skinless faces and bodies 
with linseed oil and lime-water, and covering the 
places with bulging masses of raw cotton that gave 
to every face and form a dreadful and unhuman aspect. 

A little wee French midshipman of fourteen lay 
fearfully injured, but never uttered a sound till a 
physician of Memphis was about to dress his hurts. 
Then he said: 

“‘Can I get well? You need not be afraid to tell 
imes) 

““No—I—I am afraid you cannot.” 

“Then do not waste your time with me—help 
those that can get well.” 

“But—”’ 

‘‘Help those that can get well! It is not for me 
to be a girl. I carry the blood of eleven generations 
ot soldiers in my veins!” 

oF 


MARK TWAIN 


The physician—himself a man who had seen 
service in the navy in his time—touched his hat to 
this little hero, and passed on. 

The head engineer of the Amaranth, a grand 
specimen of physical manhood, struggled to his feet, 
a ghastly spectacle, and strode toward his brother, 
the second engineer, who was unhurt. He said: 

‘““You were on watch. You were boss. You 
would not listen to me when I begged you to reduce 
your steam. Take that!—take it to my wife and 
tell her it comes from me by the hand of my mur- 
derer! Take it—and take my curse with it to 
blister your heart a hundred years—and may you 
live so long!’’ 

And he tore a ring from his finger, stripping flesh 
and skin with it, threw it down, and fell dead! 

But these things must not be dwelt upon. The 
Boreas landed her dreadful cargo at the next large 
town and delivered it over to a multitude of eager 
hands and warm Southern hearts—a cargo amount- 
ing by this time to 39 wounded persons and 22 dead 
bodies. And with these she delivered a list of 96 
missing persons that had drowned or otherwise 
perished at the scene of the disaster. 

A jury of inquest was impaneled, and after due 
deliberation and inquiry they returned the inevitable 
American verdict which has been so familiar to our 
ears all the days of our lives—‘‘ NOBODY TO BLAME.’’! 


1The incidents of the explosion are not invented. They happened 
just as they are told.—THE AUTHORS. 


CHAPTER V 


LAURA VAN BRUNT ADOPTED BY THE HAWKINSES 


G02 6: ee a Ch ee » @ BS. 
2 . et \ * 
yrs loiassle Ble) 36F SP ret SET oF SH 
Il veut faire sécher de la neige au four et la vendre pour du sel blanc. 


HEN the Boreas backed away from the land 

to continue her voyage up the river, the Haw- 

kinses were richer by twenty-four hours of experi- 
ence in the contemplation of human suffering and 
in learning through honest hard work how to relieve 
it. And they were richer in another way also. In 
the early turmoil an hour after the explosion, a 
little black-eyed girl of five years, frightened and 
crying bitterly, was struggling through the throng 
in the Boreas’s saloon calling her mother and father, 
but no one answered. Something in the face of Mr. 
Hawkins attracted her, and she came and looked up 
at him; was satisfied, and took refuge with him. 
He petted her, listened to her troubles, and said he 
would find her friends for her. Then he put her 
in a stateroom with his children, and told them to 
be kind to her (the adults of his party were all busy 
with the wounded) and straightway began his search. 
It was fruitless. But all day he and his wife 
made inquiries, and hoped against hope. All that 

39 


MARK TWAIN 


they could learn was that the child and her parents 
came on board at New Orleans, where they had 
just arrived in a vessel from Cuba; that they looked 
like people from the Atlantic states; that the family 
name was Van Brunt and the child’s name Laura. 
This was all. The parents had not been seen since 
the explosion. The child’s manners were those of 
a little lady, and her clothes were daintier and finer 
than any Mrs. Hawkins had ever seen before. 

As the hours dragged on the child lost heart, and 
cried so piteously for her mother that it seemed to 
the Hawkinses that the moanings and the wailings 
of the mutilated men and women in the saloon did 
not so strain at their heart-strings as the sufferings 
of this little desolate creature. They tried hard to 
comfort her; and in trying, learned to love her; they 
could not help it, seeing how she clung to them and 
put her arms about their necks and found no solace 
but in their kind eyes and comforting words. There 
was a question in both their hearts—a question that 
rose up and asserted itself with more and more 
pertinacity as the hours wore on; but both hesitated 
to give it voice—both kept silence and waited. 
But a time came at last when the matter would 
bear delay no longer. The boat had landed, and 
the dead and the wounded were being conveyed to 
the shore. The tired child was asleep in the arms 
of Mrs. Hawkins. Mr. Hawkins came into their 
presence and stood without speaking. His eyes met 
his wife’s; then both looked at the child, and as they 
looked it stirred in its sleep and nestled closer; an 
expression of contentment and peace settled upon 

40 


THE GILDED AGE 


its face that touched the mother-heart; and when 
the eyes of husband and wife met again, the question 
was asked and answered. 

When the Boreas had journeyed some four hun- 
dred miles from the time the Hawkinses joined her, 
a long rank of steamboats was sighted, packed side 
by side at a wharf like sardines in a box, and above 
and beyond them rose the domes and steeples and 
general architectural confusion of a city—a city with 
an imposing umbrella of black smoke spread over 
it. This was St. Louis. The children of the Haw- 
kins family were playing about the hurricane-deck, 
and the father and mother were sitting in the lee 
of the pilot-house essaying to keep order and not 
greatly grieved that they were not succeeding. 

‘“They’re worth all the trouble they are, Nancy.” 

‘Yes, and more, Si.” 

‘‘I believe you! You wouldn’t sell one of them 
at a good round figure?”’ 

‘Not for all the money in the bank, Si.” 

‘‘My own sentiments every time. It is true we 
are not rich—but still you are not sorry—you 
haven’t any misgivings about the additions?”’ 

“No. God will provide.” 

‘“‘Amen. And so you wouldn’t even part with 
Clay? Or Laura!’’ 

“Not for anything in the world. I love them just 
the same as I love my own. They pet me and spoil 
me even more than the others do, I think. I reckon 
we'll get along, Si.” 

‘“Oh yes, it will all come out right, old mother. 
I wouldn’t be afraid to adopt a thousand children 

4I 


MARK TWAIN 


if I wanted to, for there’s that Tennessee Land, 
you know—enough to make an army of them rich. 
A whole army, Nancy! You and I will never see 
the day, but these little chaps will. Indeed they 
will. One of these days it will be ‘the rich Miss 
Emily Hawkins—and the wealthy Miss Laura Van 
Brunt Hawkins—and the Hon. George Washington 
Hawkins, millionaire—and Gov. Henry Clay Haw- 
kins, millionaire!’ That is the way the world will 
word it! Don’t let’s ever fret about the children, 
Nancy—never in the world. They’re all right. 
Nancy, there’s oceans and oceans of money in that 
land—mark my words!” 

The children had stopped playing, for the mo- 
ment, and drawn near to listen. Hawkins said: 

‘Washington, my boy, what will you do when you 
get to be one of the richest men in the world?” 

‘I don’t know, father. Sometimes I think I'll 
have a balloon and go up in the air; and sometimes 
I think I'll have ever so many books; and some- 
times I think I'll have ever so many weather-cocks 
and water-wheels; or have a machine like that one 
you and Colonel Sellers bought; and sometimes I 
think I'll have—well, somehow I don’t know— 
somehow I ain’t certain; maybe I'll get a steamboat 
first. | 

‘‘The same old chap!—always just a little bit 
divided about things. And what will you do when 
you get to be one of the richest men in the world, 
Clay” 

‘I don’t know, sir. My mother—my other 
mother that’s gone away—she always told me to 

42 


THE GILDED AGE 


work along and not be much expecting to get rich, 
and then I wouldn't be disappointed if I didn’t get 
rich. And so I reckon it’s better for me to wait till 
I get rich, and then by that time maybe I[’ll know 
what I’ll want—but I don’t now, sir.”’ 

‘Careful old head! Governor Henry Clay Haw- 
kins! that’s what you'll be, Clay, one of these days. 
Wise old head! weighty old head! Go on, now, 
and play—all of you. It’s a prime lot, Nancy, as 
the Obedstown folk say about their hogs.”’ 

A smaller steamboat received the Hawkinses and 
their fortunes, and bore them a hundred and thirty 
miles still higher up the Mississippi, and landed 
them at a little tumbledown village on the Missouri 
shore in the twilight of a mellow October day. 

The next morning they harnessed up their team, 
and for two days they wended slowly into the in- 
terior through almost roadless and uninhabited forest 
solitudes. And when for the last time they pitched 
their tents, metaphorically speaking, it was at the 
goal of their hopes, their new home. 

By the muddy roadside stood a new log cabin, 
one story high—the store; clustered in the neigh- 
borhood were ten or twelve more cabins, some new, 
some old. 

In the sad light of the departing day the place 
looked homeless enough. Two or three coatiless 
young men sat in front of the store on a dry-goods 
box, and whittled it with their knives, kicked it with 
their vast boots, and shot tobacco-juice at various 
marks. Several ragged negroes leaned comfortably 
against the posts of the awning and contemplated 

43 


MARK TWAIN 


the arrival of the wayfarers with lazy curiosity. All 
these people presently managed to drag themselves 
to the vicinity of the Hawkinses’ wagon, and there 
they took up permanent positions, hands in pockets 
and resting on one leg; and thus anchored they 
proceeded to look and enjoy. Vagrant dogs came 
wagging around and making inquiries of Hawkins’s 
dog, which were not satisfactory, and they made war 
on him in concert. This would have interested the 
citizens, but it was too many on one to amount to 
anything as a fight, and so they commanded the 
peace, and the foreign dog furled his tail and took 
sanctuary under the wagon. Slatternly negro girls 
and women slouched along with pails deftly balanced 
on their heads, and joined the group and stared. 
Little half-dressed white boys, and little negro boys, 
with nothing whatever on but tow-linen shirts with a 
fine southern exposure, came from various direc- 
tions and stood with their hands locked together 
behind them and aided in the inspection. The rest 
of the population were laying down their employ- 
ments and getting ready to come, when a man burst 
through the assemblage and seized the new-comers 
by the hands in a frenzy of welcome, and exclaimed 
—indeed, almost shouted: 

‘‘Well, who could have believed it! Now is it 
you sure enough—turn around! hold up your 
heads! I want to look at you good! Well, well, 
well, it does seem most too good to be true, I de- 
clare! Lord, I’m so glad to see you! Does a 
body’s whole soul good to look at you! Shake 
hands again! Keep on shaking hands! Good- 

44 


THE GILDED AGE 


ness gracious alive. What will my wife say? Oh 
yes indeed, it’s so! married only last week—lovely, 
perfectly lovely creature, the noblest woman that 
ever—you'll like her, Nancy! Like her? Lord 
bless me you'll love her—you’ll dote on her— 
you'll be twins! Well, well, well, let me look at 
you again! Same old—why bless my life it was 
only just this very morning that my wife says, 
‘Colonel’—she will call me Colonel spite of every- 
thing I can do—she says ‘Colonel, something tells 
me somebody’s coming!’ and sure enough here you 
are, the last people on earth a body could have ex- 
pected. Why, she’ll think she’s a prophetess— 
and hanged if I don’t think so too—and you know 
there ain’t any country but what a prophet’s an 
honor to, as the proverb says. Lord bless me— 
and here’s the children, too! Washington, Emily, 
don’t you know me? Come, give us a kiss. Won't 
I fix you, though!—ponies, cows, dogs, everything 
you can think of that ‘Il delight a child’s heart— 
and— Why how’s this? Little strangers? Well 
you won’t be any strangers here, I can tell you. 
Bless your souls we'll make you think you never 
was at home before—’deed and ’deed we will, I 
can tell you! Come, now, bundle right along 
with me. You can’t glorify any hearthstone but 
mine in this camp, you know—can’t eat anybody’s 
bread but mine—can’t do anything but just make 
yourselves perfectly at home and comfortable, and 
spread yourselves out and rest! You hear me! 
Here—Jim, Tom, Pete, Jake, fly around! Take 
that team to my place—put the wagon in my lot— 
45 


MARK TWAIN 


put the horses under the shed, and get out hay and 
oats and fill them up! Ain’t any hay and oats? 
Well get some—have it charged to me—come, spin 
around, now! Now, Hawkins, the procession’s 
ready; mark time, by the left flank, forward— 
march!’ | 

And the Colonel took the lead, with Laura astride 
his neck, and the newly inspired and very grateful 
immigrants picked up their tired limbs with quite a 
spring in them and dropped into his wake. 

Presently they were ranged about an old-time fire- 
place, whose blazing logs sent out rather an un- 
necessary amount of heat; but that was no matter— 
supper was needed, and to have it, it had to be 
cooked. This apartment was the family bedroom, 
parlor, library, and kitchen, all in one. The 
matronly little wife of the Colonel moved hither and 
thither and in and out with her pots and pans in her 
hands, happiness in her heart and a world of ad- 
miration of her husband in her eyes. And when at 
last she had spread the cloth and loaded it with hot 
cornbread, fried chickens, bacon, buttermilk, coffee, 
and all manner of country luxuries, Colonel Sellers 
modified his harangue and for a moment throttled 
it down to the orthodox pitch for a blessing, and 
then instantly burst forth again as from a paren- 
thesis, and clattered on with might and main till 
every stomach in the party was laden with all it 
could carry. And when the new-comers ascended 
the ladder to their comfortable feather beds on the 
second floor—to wit, the garret—Mrs. Hawkins was 
obliged to say: 

46 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘“Hang the fellow, I do believe he has gone wilder 
than ever, but still a body can’t help liking him if 
they would—and what is more, they don’t ever 
want to try when they see his eyes and hear him 
t@dke.”” 

Within a week or two the Hawkinses were com- 
fortably domiciled in a new log house, and were 
beginning to feel at home. The children were put 
to school; at least, it was what passed for a school in 
those days: a place where tender young humanity 
devoted itself for eight or ten hours a day to learn- 
ing incomprehensible rubbish by heart out of books 
and reciting it by rote, like parrots; so that a fin- 
ished education consisted simply of a permanent 
headache and the ability to read without stopping 
to spell the words or take breath. Hawkins bought 
out the village store for a song and proceeded to 
reap the profits, which amounted to but little more 
than another song. 

The wonderful speculation hinted at by Colonel 
Sellers in his letter turned out to be the raising of 
mules for the Southern market; and really it prom- 
ised very well. The young stock cost but a trifle, 
the rearing but another trifle, and so Hawkins was 
easily persuaded to embark his slender means in the 
enterprise, and turn over the keep and care of the 
animals to Sellers and Uncle Dan’l. 

All went well. Business prospered little by little. 
Hawkins even built a new house, made it two full 
stories high and put a lightning-rod on it. People 
came two or three miles to look at it. But they 
knew that the rod attracted the lightning, and so 

47 


MARK TWAIN 


they gave the place a wide berth in a storm, for they 
were familiar with marksmanship and doubted if the 
lightning could hit that small stick at a distance of 
a mile and a half oftener than once in a hundred 
and fifty times. Hawkins fitted out his house with 
“‘store’’ furniture from St. Louis, and the fame of 
its magnificence went abroad in the land. Even the 
parlor carpet was from St. Louis—though the other 
rooms were clothed in the “‘rag’’ carpeting of the 
country. Hawkins put up the first ‘“‘paling’’ fence 
that had ever adorned the village; and he did not 
stop there, but whitewashed it. His oilcloth win- 
dow-curtains had noble pictures on them of castles 
such as had never been seen anywhere in the world 
but on window-curtains. Hawkins enjoyed the ad- 
miration these prodigies compelled, but he always 
smiled to think how poor and cheap they were, 
compared to what the Hawkins mansion would dis- 
play in a future day after the Tennessee Land should 
have borne its minted fruit. Even Washington 
observed, once, that when the Tennessee Land was 
sold he would have a ‘“‘store’’ carpet in his and 
Clay’s room like the one in the parlor. This pleased 
Hawkins, but it troubled his wife. It did not seem 
wise, to her, to put one’s entire earthly trust in the 
Tennessee Land and never think of doing any work. 

Hawkins took a weekly Philadelphia newspaper 
and a semi-weekly St. Louis journal—almost the 
only papers that came to the village, though Godey’s 
Lady’s Book found a good market there, and was 
regarded as the perfection of polite literature by 
some of the ablest critics in the place. Perhaps it 

48 


THE GILDED AGE 


is only fair to explain that we are writing of a bygone 
age—some twenty or thirty years ago. In the two 
newspapers referred to lay the secret of Hawkins’s 
growing prosperity. They kept him informed of the 
condition of the crops South and East, and thus he 
knew which articles were likely to be in demand and 
which articles were likely to be unsalable, weeks and 
even months in advance of the simple folk about 
him. As the months went by he came to be re- 
garded as a wonderfully lucky man. It did not 
occur to the citizens that brains were at the bottom 
of his luck. 

His title of ‘‘Squire’’ came into vogue again, 
but only for a season; for, as his wealth and popu- 
larity augmented, that title, by imperceptible stages, 
grew up into ‘‘Judge’’; indeed, it bade fair to swell 
into ‘‘General”’ by and by. All strangers of conse- 
quence who visited the village gravitated to the 
Hawkins Mansion and became guests of the ‘‘ Judge.”’ 

Hawkins had learned to like the people of his 
section very much. They were uncouth and not 
cultivated, and not particularly industrious; but 
they were honest and straightforward, and their 
virtuous ways commanded respect. Their patriot- 
ism was strong, their pride in the flag was of the 
old-fashioned pattern, their love of country amounted 
to idolatry. Whoever dragged the national honor 
in the dirt won their deathless hatred. They still 
cursed Benedict Arnold as if he were a personal 
friend who had broken faith but a week gone by. 


CHArl ina t 


TEN YEARS LATER. LAURA A YOUNG BEAUTY 


TS i oe Ft 


Mesu eu azheiadshet 
WashkebemAatizitaking, 
NAwuj beshegandaguzé 
ManwAbegénig edush wen. 
Ojibwa Nuguwioshang, p. 78. 


E skip ten years, and this history finds cer- 
tain changes to record. 

Judge Hawkins and Colonel Sellers have made and 
lost two or three moderate fortunes in the mean time, 
and are now pinched by poverty. Sellers has two 
pairs of twins and four extras. In Hawkins’s family 
are six children of his own and two adopted ones. 
From time to time, as fortune smiled, the elder chil- 
dren got the benefit of it, spending the lucky seasons 
at excellent schools in St. Louis and the unlucky 
ones at home in the chafing discomfort of straitened 
circumstances. 

Neither the Hawkins children nor the world that 
knew them ever supposed that one of the girls was 
of alien blood and parentage. Such difference as 
existed between Laura and Emily is not uncommon 

50 


THe GILDED AGE 


inafamily. The girls had grown up as sisters, and 
they were both too young at the time of the fearful 
accident on the Mississippi to know that it was that 
which had thrown their lives together. 

And yet any one who had known the secret of 
Laura’s birth and had seen her during these passing 
years, say at the happy age of twelve or thirteen, 
would have fancied that he knew the reason why 
she was more winsome than her school companion. 

Philosophers dispute whether it is the promise of 
what she will be, in the careless school-girl, that 
makes her attractive, the undeveloped maidenhood, 
or the mere natural, careless sweetness of childhood. 
If Laura at twelve was beginning to be a beauty, the 
thought of it had never entered her head. No, 
indeed. Her mind was filled with more important 
thoughts. To her simple school-girl dress she was 
beginning to add those mysterious little adorn- 
ments of ribbon-knots and ear-rings, which were the 
subject of earnest consultations with her grown 
friends. 

When she tripped down the street on a summer’s 
day with her dainty hands propped into the ribbon- 
broidered pockets of her apron, and elbows conse- 
quently more or less akimbo, with her wide Leghorn 
hat flapping down and hiding her face one moment 
and blowing straight up against her forehead the 
next and making its revealment of fresh young 
beauty; with all her pretty girlish airs and graces in 
full play, and that sweet ignorance of care and that 
atmosphere of innocence and purity all about her 
that belongs to her gracious time of life; indeed, she 

SI 


MARK TWAIN 


was a vision to warm the coldest heart and bless and 
cheer the saddest. 

Wilful, generous, forgiving, imperious, affection- 
ate, improvident—bewitching, in short—was Laura 
at this period. Could she have remained there, this 
history would not need to be written. But Laura 
had grown to be almost a woman in these few years, 
to the end of which we have now come—years 
which had seen Judge Hawkins pass through so 
many trials. 

When the Judge’s first bankruptcy came upon 
him, a homely human angel intruded upon him with 
an offer of $1,500 for the Tennessee Land. Mrs. 
Hawkins said take it. It was a grievous temptation, 
but the Judge withstood it. He said the land was 
for the children—he could not rob them of their 
future millions for so paltry a sum. When the 
second blight fell upon him, another angel appeared 
and offered $3,000 for the land. He was in such 
deep distress that he allowed his wife to persuade 
him to let the papers be drawn; but when his chil- 
dren came into his presence in their poor apparel, 
he felt like a traitor and refused to sign. 

But now he was down again, and deeper in the 
mire than ever. He paced the floor all day, he 
scarcely slept at night. He blushed even to ac- 
knowledge it to himself, but treason was in his mind 
—he was meditating, at last, the sale of the land. 
Mrs. Hawkins stepped into the room. He had not 
spoken a word, but he felt as guilty as if she had 
caught him in some shameful act. She said: 

‘‘Si, I do not know what we are going to do. 

52 


THE GILDED AGE 


The children are not fit to be seen, their clothes are 
in such a state. But there’s something more serious 
still. There is scarcely a bite in the house to 
eat. 

“Why, Nancy, go to Johnson—’”’ 

“Johnson indeed! You took that man’s part 
when he hadn’t a friend in the world, and you built 
him up and made him rich. And here’s the result 
of it: He lives in our fine house, and we live in his 
miserable log cabin. He has hinted to our children 
that he would rather they wouldn’t come about his 
yard to play with his children— which I can bear, 
and bear easy enough, for they’re not a sort we 
want to associate with much—but what I can’t bear 
with any quietness at all, is his telling Franky our 
bill was running pretty high this morning when I 
sent him for some meal—and that was all he said, 
too—didn’t give him the meal—turned off and 
went to talking with the Hargrave girls about some 
stuff they wanted to cheapen.”’ 

“Nancy, this is astounding!”’ 

““And so it is, ] warrant you. I’ve kept still, Si, 
as long as ever I could. Things have been getting 
worse and worse, and worse and worse, every single 
day; I don’t go out of the house, I feel so down; 
but you had trouble enough, and I wouldn’t say a 
word—and I wouldn’t say a word now, only things 
have got so bad that I don’t know what to do, nor 
where to turn.” And she gave way and put her 
face in her hands and cried. 

‘Poor child, don’t grieve so. Inever thought that 
of Johnson. I am clear at my wit’s end. I don’t 

53 


MARK TWAIN 


know what in the world to do. Now, if some- 
body would come along and offer $3,000—oh, if 
somebody only would come along and offer $3,000 
for that Tennessee Land—”’ | 

“You'd sell it, Si?’ said Mrs. Hawkins excitedly. 

aay ies | 

Mrs. Hawkins was out of the room in a moment. 
Within a minute she was back again with a business- 
looking stranger, whom she seated, and then she 
took her leave again. Hawkins said to himself, 
““How can a man ever lose faith? When the black- 
est hour comes, Providence always comes with it— 
ah, this is the very timeliest help that ever poor 
harried devil had; if this blessed man offers but a 
thousand I’ll embrace him like a brother!”’ 

The stranger said: 

‘“‘I am aware that you own 75,000 acres of land 
in East Tennessee, and, without sacrificing your 
time, I will come to the point at once. I am agent 
of an iron- manufacturing company, and they em- 
power me to offer you ten thousand dollars for that 
land.” 

Hawkins’s heart bounded within him. His whole 
frame was racked and wrenched with fettered 
hurrahs. His first impulse was to shout—‘‘Done! 
and God bless the iron company, too!”’ 

But a something flitted through his mind, and 
his opened lips uttered nothing. The enthusiasm 
faded away from his eyes, and the look of a man 
who is thinking took its place. Presently, in a 
hesitating, undecided way, he said: 

“Well, I—it don’t seem quite enough. That— 

54 


ifet GILDED AGE 


that is a very valuable property—very valuable. It’s 
brimful of iron ore, sir—brimful of it! And copper, 
coal—everything—everything you can think of! 
Now, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll reserve every- 
thing except the iron, and I'll sell them the iron 
property for $15,000 cash, I to go in with them and 
own an undivided interest of one-half the concern 
—or the stock, as you say. I’m out of business, and 
I’d just as soon help run the thing as not. Now how 
does that strike you?”’ 

‘Well, I am only an agent of these people, who 
are friends of mine, and I am not even paid for 
my services. To tell you the truth, I have tried 
to persuade them not to go into the thing; and I 
have come square out with their offer, without 
throwing out any feelers—and I did it in the hope 
that you would refuse. A man pretty much always 
refuses another man’s first offer, no matter what it 
is. But I have performed my duty, and will take 
pleasure in telling them what you say.”’ 

He was about to rise. Hawkins said: 

“Wait a bit.” 

Hawkins thought again. And the substance of 
his thought was: ‘‘This is a deep man; this is a 
very deep man; I don’t like his candor; your osten- 
tatiously candid business man’s a deep fox—always 
a deep fox; this man’s that iron company himself— 
that’s what he is; he wants that property, too; I 
am not so blind but I can see that; he don’t want 
the company to go into this thing—O, that’s very 
good; yes, that’s very good indeed—stuff! he’ll be 
back here to-morrow, sure, and take my offer; take 

55 


MARK TWAIN 


it? Jl risk anything he is suffering to take it now; 
here—I must mind what I’m about. What has 
started this sudden excitement about iron? I won- 
der what zs in the wind? just as sure as I’m alive 
this moment, there’s something tremendous stirring 
in iron speculation”’ [here Hawkins got up and began 
to pace the floor with excited eyes and with gestur- 
ing hands]|—‘‘something enormous going on in iron, 
without the shadow of a doubt, and here I sit mousing 
in the dark and never knowing anything about it; 
great heaven, what an escape I’ve made! this under- 
handed mercenary creature might have taken me 
up—and ruined me! but I have escaped, and I 
warrant me I'll not put my foot into—” 

He stopped and turned toward the stranger, saying: 

“‘T have made you a proposition—you have not 
accepted it, and I desire that you will consider that 
I have made none. At the same time my con- 
science will not allow me to— Please alter the 
figures I named to thirty thousand dollars, if you 
will, and let the proposition go to the company— 
I will stick to it if it breaks my heart!’ 

The stranger looked amused, and there was a 
pretty well-defined touch of surprise in his expres- 
sion, too, but Hawkins never noticed it. Indeed, 
he scarcely noticed anything or knew what he was 
about. The man left; Hawkins flung himself into 
a chair; thought a few moments, then glanced 
around, looked frightened, sprang to the door— 

‘“‘Too late—too late! He’s gone! Fool that I 
am!—always a fool! Thirty thousand—ass that I 
am! Oh, why didn’t I say fifty thousand!” 

56 


THE GILDED AGE 


He plunged his hands into his hair and leaned his 
elbows on his knees, and fell to rocking himself 
back and forth in anguish. Mrs. Hawkins sprang 
in, beaming: 

eel, Si?” 

‘‘Oh, con-found the con-founded—con-found it, 
Nancy. I’ve gone and done it, now!” 

‘‘Done what, Si, for mercy’s sake!”’ 

‘‘Done everything! Ruined everything!” 

‘“Tell me, tell me, tell me! Don’t keep a body in 
such suspense. Didn’t he buy, after all? Didn't 
he make an offer?” 

‘‘Offer? He offered $10,000 for our land, and—’”’ 

‘“Thank the good Providence from the very bot- 
tom of my heart of hearts! What sort of ruin do 
you call that, Si!” 

‘“‘Nancy, do you suppose I listened to such a 
preposterous proposition? No! Thank fortune I’m 
not a simpleton! I saw through the pretty scheme 
in a second. It’s a vast iron speculation! millions 
upon millions init! But fool as Iam I told him he 
could have half the iron property for thirty thousand 
—and if I only had him back here he couldn’t touch 
it for a cent less than a quarter of a million!” 

Mrs. Hawkins looked up, white and despairing: 

“You threw away this chance, you let this man 
go, and we in this awful trouble? You don’t mean 
it, you can’t mean it?” 

“Throw it away? Catch me at it! Why, woman, 
do you suppose that man don’t know what he is 
about? Bless you, he’ll be back fast enough to- 
morrow.” 


/ 


57 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Never, never, never. He never will come back. 
I don’t know what is to become of us. I don’t 
know what in the world is to become of us.”’ 

A shade of uneasiness came into Hawkins’s face. 
He said: 

“Why, Nancy, you—you can’t believe what you 
are saying.” 

‘Believe it, indeed? I know it, Si. And I know 
that we haven’t a cent in the world, and we’ve sent 
ten thousand dollars a-begging.”’ 

“Nancy, you frighten me. Now could that man 
—is it possible that I—hanged if I don’t believe I 
have missed a chance! Don’t grieve, Nancy, don’t 
grieve. I'll go right after him. I'll take — I'll 
take—what a fool I am!—Ill take anything he’ll 
give!” 

The next instant he left the house onarun. But 
the man was no longer in the town. Nobody knew 
where he belonged or whither he had gone. Haw- 
kins came slowly back, watching wistfully but hope- 
lessly for the stranger, and lowering his price steadily 
with his sinking heart. And when his foot finally 
pressed his own threshold, the value he held the en- 
tire Tennessee property at was five hundred dollars 
—two hundred down and the rest in three equal 
annual payments, without interest. 

There was a sad gathering at the Hawkins fireside 
the next night. All the children were present but 
Clay. Mr. Hawkins said: 

‘‘Washington, we seem to be hopelessly fallen, 
hopelessly involved. I am ready to give up. I do 


not know where to turn—I never have been down 
cQ 
vn 


he “Gi L OED AGE 


so low before, I never have seen things so dismal. 
There are many mouths to feed; Clay is at work; 
we must lose you, also, for a little while, my boy. 
But it will not be long—the Tennessee land—”’ 

He stopped, and was conscious of a blush. There 
was silence for a moment, and then Washington— 
now a lank, dreamy-eyed stripling between twenty- 
two and twenty-three years of age—said: 

‘“‘If Colonel Sellers would come for me, I would go 
and stay with him awhile, till the Tennessee land is 
sold. He has often wanted me to come, ever since 
he moved to Hawkeye.” 

‘“‘T’m afraid he can’t well come for you, Washing- 
ton. From what I can hear—not from him of 
course, but from others—he is not far from as bad 
off as we are—and his family is as large, too. He 
might find something for you to do, maybe, but 
you'd better try to get to him yourself, Washington 
—it’s only thirty miles.” 

“But how can JI, father? There’s no stage or 
anything.”’ 

“‘And if there were, stages require money. A 
stage goes from Swansea, five miles from here. But 
it would be cheaper to walk.” 

‘Father, they must know you there, and no doubt 
they would credit you in a moment, for a little stage 
ride like that. Couldn’t you write and ask them?”’ 

‘“‘Couldn’t you, Washington—seeing it’s you that 
wants the ride? And what do you think you'll do, 
Washington, when you get to Hawkeye? Finish 
your invention for making window-glass opaque?” 

‘‘No, sir, I have given that up. I almost knew I 

38) 


MARK TWAIN 


could do it, but it was so tedious and troublesome I 
eu i. 

‘“‘T was afraid of it, my boy. Then I suppose 
you'll finish your plan of coloring hen’s eggs by 
feeding a peculiar diet to the hen?” 

‘‘No, sir. I believe I have found out the stuff 
that will do it, but it kills the hen; so I have dropped 
that for the present, though I can take it up again 
some day when I learn how to manage the mixture 
better.” 

‘Well, what have you got on hand—anything?”’ 

‘Yes, sir, three or four things. I think they are 
all good and can all be done, but they are tiresome, 
and besides they require money. But as soon as the 
land is sold—’ 

‘‘Emily, were you about to say something?” said 
Hawkins. 

“Yes, sir. If you are willing, I will got to St. 
Louis. That will make another mouth less to feed. 
Mrs. Buckner has always wanted me to come.” 

‘‘But the money, child?” 

**Why, I think she would send it, if you would write 
her—and I know she would wait for her pay till—”’ 

‘Come, Laura, let’s hear from you, my girl.”’ 

Emily and Laura were about the same age—be- 
tween seventeen and eighteen. Emily was fair and 
pretty, girlish and diffident—blue eyes and light 
hair. Laura had a proud bearing and a somewhat 
mature look; she had fine, clean-cut features, her 
complexion was pure white and contrasted vividly 
with her black hair and eyes; she was not what one. 
calls pretty—she was beautiful. She said: 

60 


Thm GiLDED “AGE 


“T will go to St. Louis, too, sir. I will find a 
way to get there. I will make a way. And I will 
find a way to help myself along, and do what I can 
to help the rest, too.”’ 

She spoke it like a princess. Mrs. Hawkins 
smiled proudly and kissed her, saying in a tone of 
fond reproof: 

‘So one of my girls is going to turn out and 
work for her living! It’s like your pluck and spirit, 
child, but we will hope that we haven’t got quite 
down to that, yet.” 

The girl’s eyes beamed affection under her moth- 
er’s caress. Then she straightened up, folded her 
white hands in her lap, and became a splendid 
iceberg. Clay’s dog put up his brown nose for a 
little attention, and got it. He retired under the 
table with an apologetic yelp, which did not affect 
the iceberg. 

Judge Hawkins had written and asked Clay to 
return home and consult with him upon family 
affairs. He arrived the evening after this conversa- 
tion, and the whole household gave him a rapturous 
welcome. He brought sadly needed help with him, 
consisting of the savings of a year and a half of 
work—nearly two hundred dollars in money. 

It was a ray of sunshine which (to this easy 
household) was the earnest of a clearing sky. 

Bright and early in the morning the family were 
astir, and all were busy preparing Washington for 
his journey—at least all but Washington himself, 
who sat apart, steeped in a reverie. When the time 
for his departure came, it was easy to see how 

61 


MARK TWAIN 


fondly all loved him and how hard it was to let 
him go, notwithstanding they had often seen him 
go before, in his St. Louis schooling-days. In the 
most matter-of-course way they had borne the 
burden of getting him ready for his trip, never 
seeming to think of his helping in the matter; in the 
same matter-of-course way Clay had hired a horse 
and cart; and now that the good-bys were ended 
he bundled Washington’s baggage in and drove away 
with the exile. 

At Swansea Clay paid his stage fare, stowed him 
away in the vehicle, and saw him off. Then he 
returned home and reported progress, like a com- 
mittee of the whole. 

Clay remained at home several days. He held 
many consultations with his mother upon the finan- 
cial condition of the family, and talked once with 
his father upon the same subject, but only once. 
He found a-change in that quarter which was dis- 
tressing; years of fluctuating fortune had done their 
work; each reverse had weakened the father’s spirit 
and impaired his energies; his last misfortune 
seemed to have left hope and ambition dead within 
him; he had no projects, formed no plans—evidently 
he was a vanquished man. He looked worn and 
tired. He inquired into Clay’s affairs and pros- 
pects, and when he found that Clay was doing 
pretty well and was likely to do still better, it was 
plain that he resigned himself with easy facility to 
look to the son for a support; and he said, “‘Keep 
yourself informed of poor Washington’s condition and 
movements, and help him along all you can, Clay.” 

62 


THE GILDED AGE 


The younger children, also, seemed relieved of all 
fears and distresses, and very ready and willing to 
look to Clay for a livelihood. Within three days a 
general tranquillity and satisfaction reigned in the 
household. Clay’s hundred and eighty or ninety 
dollars had worked a wonder. The family were as 
contented, now, and as free from care as they could 
have been with a fortune. It was well that Mrs. 
Hawkins held the purse—otherwise the treasure 
would have lasted but a very little while. 

It took but a trifle to pay Hawkins’s outstanding 
obligations, for he had always had a horror of debt. 

When Clay bade his home good-by and set out 
to return to the field of his labors, he was conscious 
that henceforth he was to have his father’s family 
on his hands as pensioners; but he did not allow 
himself to chafe at the thought, for he reasoned that 
his father had dealt by him with a free hand and a 
loving one all his life, and now that hard fortune 
had broken his spirit it ought to be a pleasure, not a 
pain, to work for him. The younger children were 
born and educated dependents. They had never 
been taught to do anything for themselves, and it 
did not seem to occur to them to make an attempt 
now. 

The girls would not have been permitted to work 
for a living under any circumstances whatever. It 
was a Southern family, and of good blood; and for 
any person except Laura, either within or without 
the household, to have suggested such an idea would 
have brought upon the suggester the suspicion of 
being a lunatic. 

63 


CHAPTER VII 
COLONEL SELLERS’S SCHEMES FOR MONEY-MAKING 


Via, Pecunia! when she’s run and gone 

And fled, and dead, then will I fetch her again 
With aqua vite, out of an old hogshead! 

While there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer, 

Ill never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs, 
Dust, but I'll have her! raise wool upon egg-shells, 
Sir, and make grass grow out of marrow-bones, 


To make her come! 
: Ben Jonson. 


EARING Washington Hawkins and his fortunes, 

the stage-coach tore out of Swansea at a fearful 
gait, with horn tooting gaily and half the town 
admiring from doors and windows. But it did not 
tear any more after it got to the outskirts; it dragged 
along stupidly enough, then—till it came in sight 
of the next hamlet; and then the bugle tooted 
gaily again, and again the vehicle went tearing by 
the houses. This sort of conduct marked every 
entry to a station and every exit from it; and so 
in those days children grew up with the idea that - 
stage-coaches always tore and always tooted; but 
they also grew up with the idea that pirates went 
into action in their Sunday clothes, carrying the 
black flag in one hand and pistoling people with the 
other, merely because they were so represented in 

64 


hE GILDED» AGE 


the pictures: but these illusions vanished when later 
years brought their disenchanting wisdom. ‘They 
learned then that the stage-coach is but a poor, 
plodding, vulgar thing in the solitudes of the high- 
way; and that the pirate is only a seedy, unfantastic 
“rough,”’ when he is out of the pictures. 

Toward evening, the stage-coach came thundering 
into Hawkeye with a perfectly triumphant ostenta- 
tion—which was natural and proper, for Hawkeye 
was a pretty large town for interior Missouri. 
Washington, very stiff and tired and hungry, 
climbed out, and wondered how he was to proceed 
now. But his difficulty was quickly solved. Colonel 
Sellers came down the street on a run and arrived 
panting for breath. He said: 

“Lord bless you—I’m glad to see you, Washing- 
ton—perfectly delighted to-see you, my boy! I 
got your message. Been on the lookout for you. 
Heard the stage horn, but had a party I couldn’t 
shake off—man that’s got an enormous thing on 
hand—wants me to put some capital into it—and 
I tell you, my boy, I could do worse, I could doa 
deal worse. No, now, let that luggage alone; I'll 
fix that. Here, Jerry, got anything to do? All 
right—shoulder this plunder and follow me. Come 
along, Washington. Lord, I’m glad to see you! 
Wife and the children are just perishing to look at 
you. Bless you, they won’t know you, you’ve 
grown so. Folks all well, I suppose? That’s good 
—glad to hear that. We're always going to run 
down and see them, but I’m into so many opera- 
tions, and they’re not things a man feels like trust- 

65 


MARK TWAIN 


ing to other people, and so somehow we keep putting 
it off. Fortunes in them! Good gracious, it’s the 
country to pile up wealth in! Here we are—here’s 
where the Sellers dynasty hangs out. Dump it on 
the doorstep, Jerry—the blackest niggro in the state, 
Washington, but got a good heart—rmighty likely boy, 
is Jerry. And now I suppose you’ve got to have ten 
cents, Jerry. That’s all right—when a man works 
for me—when a man—in the other pocket, I reckon 
—when a man—why, where the mischief zs that port- 
monnaie!—when a—well now that’s odd—Oh, now 
I remember, must have left it at the bank; and 
b’ George I’ve left my check-book, too—Polly says 
I ought to have a nurse—well, no matter. Let me 
have a dime, Washington, if you’ve got—ah, thanks. 
Now clear out, Jerry, your complexion has brought 
on the twilight half an hour ahead of time. Pretty 
fair joke—pretty fair. Here he is, Polly! Wash- 
ington’s come, children!—come now, don’t eat him 
up—finish him in the house. Welcome, my boy, to 
a mansion that is proud to shelter the son of the 
best man that walks on the ground. Si Hawkins 
has been a good friend to me, and I believe I can 
say that whenever I’ve had a chance to put him into 
a good thing I’ve done it, and done it pretty cheer- 
fully, too. I put him into that sugar speculation— 
what a grand thing that was, if we hadn’t held on 
too long!”’ 

True enough; but holding on too long had utterly 
ruined both of them; and the saddest part of it was, 
that they never had had so much money to lose 
before, for Sellers’s sale of their mule crop that year 

66 


THE GILDED AGE 


in New Orleans had been a great financial success. 
If he had kept out of sugar and gone back home 
content to stick to mules it would have been a happy 
wisdom. As it was, he managed to kill two birds 
with one stone—that is to say, he killed the sugar 
speculation by holding for high rates till he had to 
sell at the bottom figure, and that calamity killed 
the mule that laid the golden egg—which is but a 
figurative expression and will be so understood. 
Sellers had returned home cheerful but empty- 
handed, and the mule business lapsed into other 
hands. The sale of the Hawkins property by the 
sheriff had followed, and the Hawkins hearts been 
torn to see Uncle Dan’l and his wife pass from the 
auction-block into the hands of a negro trader and 
depart for the remote South to be seen no more by 
the family. It had seemed like seeing their own 
flesh and blood sold into banishment. 

Washington was greatly pleased with the Sellers 
mansion. It was a two-story-and-a-half brick, and 
much more stylish than any of its neighbors. He was 
borne to the family sitting-room in triumph by the 
swarm of little Sellerses, the parents following with 
their arms about each other’s waists. 

The whole family were poorly and cheaply 
dressed; and the clothing, although neat and clean, 
showed many evidences of having seen long service. 
The Colonel’s ‘‘stovepipe’’ hat was napless and 
shiny with much polishing, but nevertheless it had 
an almost convincing expression about it of having 
been just purchased new. The rest of his clothing 
was napless and shiny, too, but it had the air of 

67 


MARK TWAIN 


being entirely satisfied with itself and blandly sorry 
for other people’s clothes. It was growing rather 
dark in the house, and the evening air was chilly, 
too. Sellers said: 

‘“‘Lay off your overcoat, Washington, and draw 
up to the stove and make yourself at home—just 
consider yourself under your own shingles, my boy 
—I'll have a fire going, in a jiffy. Light the lamp, 
Polly, dear, and let’s have things cheerful—just as 
glad to see you, Washington, as if you’d been lost 
a century and we’d found you again!” 

By this time the Colonel was conveying a lighted 
match into a poor little stove. Then he propped 
the stove-door to its place by leaning the poker 
against it, for the hinges had retired from business. 
This door framed a small square of isinglass, which 
now warmed up with a faint glow. Mrs. Sellers lit 
a cheap, showy lamp, which dissipated a good deal 
of the gloom, and then everybody gathered into the 
light and took the stove into close companionship. 

The children climbed all over Sellers, fondled 
him, petted him, and were lavishly petted in return. 
Out from this tugging, laughing, chattering disguise 
of legs and arms and little faces, the Colonel’s. voice 
worked its way and his tireless tongue ran blithely 
on without interruption; and the purring little wife, 
diligent with her knitting, sat near at hand and 
looked happy and proud and grateful; and she 
listened as one who listens to oracles and gospels 
and whose grateful soul is being refreshed with the 
bread of life. By and by the children quieted 
down to listen; clustered about their father, and 

68 


THE "GILDED AGE 


resting their elbows on his legs, they hung upon his 
words as if he were uttering the music of the spheres. 

A dreary old haircloth sofa against the wall; a 
few damaged chairs; the small table the lamp stood 
on; the crippled stove—these things constituted 
the furniture of the room. ‘There was no carpet on 
the floor; on the wall were occasional square-shaped 
interruptions of the general tint of the plaster which 
betrayed that there used to be pictures in the house 
—but there were none now. There were no mantel 
ornaments, unless one might bring himself to regard 
as an ornament a clock which never came within 
fifteen strokes of striking the right time, and whose 
hands always hitched together at twenty-two minutes 
past anything and traveled in company the rest of 
the way home. 

““Remarkable clock!’ said Sellers, and got up 
and wound it. ‘‘I’ve been offered—well, I wouldn’t 
expect you to believe what I’ve been offered for 
that clock. Old Governor Hager never sees me 
but he says, ‘Come, now, Colonel, name your 
price—I must have that clock!’ But my goodness 
I’d as soon think of selling my wife. As I was say- 
ing to—silence in the court, now, she’s begun to 
strike! You can’t talk against her—you have to 
just be patient and hold up till she’s said her say. 
Ah—well, as I was saying, when—she’s beginning 
again! Nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, 
twen—ah, that’s all. Yes, as I was saying to old 
Judge—go it, old girl, don’t mind me. Now how 
is that? Isn’t that a good, spirited tone? She 
can wake the dead! Sleep? Why you might as 

69 


MARK TWAIN 


well try to sleep in a thunder factory. Now just 
listen at that. She'll strike a hundred and fifty, 
now, without stopping—you'll see. There ain’t 
another clock like that in Christendom.” 

Washington hoped that this might be true, for 
the din was distracting—though the family, one 
and all, seemed filled with joy; and the more the 
clock “buckled down to her work”’ as the Colonel 
expressed it, and the more insupportable the clatter 
became, the more enchanted they all appeared to 
be. When there was silence, Mrs. Sellers lifted 
upon Washington a face that beamed with a child- 
like pride, and said: 

“It belonged to his grandmother.”’ 

The look and the tone were a plain call for ad- 
miring surprise, and therefore Washington said— 
(it was the only thing that offered itself at the mo- 
ment): 

*“Indeed!”’ 

*“Yes, it did, didn’t it, father!’ exclaimed one of 
the twins. ‘‘She was my great-grandmother—and 
George’s too; wasn’t she, father! You never saw 
her, but Sis has seen her, when Sis was a baby— 
didn’t you, Sis! Sis has seen her most a hundred 
times. She was awful deef—she’s dead, now. 
Ain’t she, father!’’ 

All the children chimed in, now, with one general 
Babel of information about deceased—nobody offer- 
ing to read the riot act or seeming to discountenance 
the insurrection or disapprove of it in any way— 
but the head twin drowned all the turmoil and held 
his own against the field: 

70 


THE GILDED AGE 


“Tt’s our clock, now—and it’s got wheels inside 
of it, and a thing that flutters every time she strikes 
—don’t it, father! Great-grandmother died before 
hardly any of us were born—she was an Old-School 
Baptist and had warts all over her—you ask father 
if she didn’t. She had an uncle once that was bald- 
headed and used to have fits; he wasn’t our uncle, 
I don’t know what he was to us—some kin or 
another I reckon—father’s seen him a thousand 
times—hain’t you, father! We used to have a calf 
that et apples and just chawed up dishrags like noth- 
ing, and if you stay here you'll see lots of funerals— 
won't he, Sis! Did you ever see a house afire? 
I have! Once me and Jim Terry—”’ 

But Sellers began to speak now, and the storm 
ceased. He began to tell about an enormous specu- 
lation he was thinking of embarking some capital 
in—a speculation which some London bankers 
had been over to consult with him about—and 
soon he was building glittering pyramids of coin, 
and Washington was presently growing opulent 
under the magic of his eloquence. But at the same 
time Washington was not able to ignore the cold 
entirely. He was nearly as close to the stove as he 
could get, and yet he could not persuade himself 
that he felt the slightest heat, notwithstanding the 
isinglass door was still gently and serenely glowing. 
He tried to get a trifle closer to the stove, and the 
consequence was, he tripped the supporting poker 
and the stove-door tumbled to the floor. And then 
there was a revelation—there was nothing in the 
stove but a lighted tallow candle! 

Fas 


MARK TWAIN 


The poor youth blushed and felt as if he must die 
with shame. But the Colonel was only disconcerted 
for a moment—he straightway found his voice 
again: 

“A little idea of my own,, Washington—one of 
the greatest things in the world! You must write 
and tell your father about it — don’t forget that, 
now. I have been reading up some European 
scientific reports—friend of mine, Count Fugier, 
sent them to me—sends me all sorts of things from 
Paris—he thinks the world of me, Fugier does. 
Well, I saw that the Academy of France had been 
testing the properties of heat, and they came to the 
conclusion that it was a non-conductor or something 
like that, and of course its influence must necessarily 
be deadly in nervous organizations with excitable 
temperaments, especially where there is any ten- 
dency toward rheumatic affections. Bless you, I 
saw in a moment what was the matter with us, and 
says I, out goes your fires!—no more slow torture 
and certain death for me, sir. What you want is the 
appearance of heat, not the heat itself—that’s the 
idea. Well, how to do it was the next thing. I 
just put my head to work, pegged away a couple 
of days, and here you are! Rheumatism? Why a 
man can’t any more start a case of rheumatism in 
this house than he can shake an opinion out of a 
mummy! Stove with a candle in it and a trans- 
parent door—that’s it—it has been the salvation of 
this family. Don’t you fail to write your father about 
it, Washington. And tell him the idea is mine— 
I’m no more conceited than most people, I reckon, 

72 


fe GILDED AGE 


but you know it is human nature for a man to want 
credit for a thing like that.”’ 

Washington said with his blue lips that he would, 
but he said in his secret heart that he would promote 
no such iniquity. He tried to believe in the health- 
fulness of the invention, and succeeded tolerably 
well; but after all he could not feel that good health 
in a frozen body was any real improvement on the 
rheumatism. 


CHAPTER VIII 
COLONEL SELLERS ENTERTAINS WASHINGTON HAWKINS 


—Whan be borde.is thynne, as of seruyse, 
Nought replenesshed with grete diuersite 
Of mete & drinke, good chere may then suffise 
With honest talkyng— 
The Book of Curtesye. 


Mammon. Come on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore 
In Novo Orbe; here’s the rich Peru: 
And there, within, sir, are the golden mines, 
Great Solomon’s Ophir!— 
Ben Fonson. The Alchemist. 


HE supper at Colonel Sellers’s was not sump- 

tuous, in the beginning, but 1t improved on ac- 
quaintance. That isto say, that what Washington re- 
garded at first sight as mere lowly potatoes, presently 
became awe-inspiring agricultural productions that 
had been reared in some ducal garden beyond the 
sea, under the sacred eye of the duke himself, who 
had sent them to Sellers; the bread was from corn 
which could be grown in only one favored locality 
in the earth and only a favored few could get it; 
the Rio coffee, which at first seemed execrable to 
the taste, took to itself an improved flavor when 
Washington was told to drink it slowly and not 
hurry what should be a lingering luxury in order to 
be fully appreciated—it was from the private stores 

74 


THE GILDED -AGE 


of a Brazilian nobleman with an unrememberable 
name. The Colonel’s tongue was a magician’s wand 
that turned dried apples into figs and water into 
wine as easily as it could change a hovel into a 
palace and present poverty into imminent future 
riches. 

Washington slept in a cold bed in a carpetless 
room and woke up in a palace in the morning; at 
least the palace lingered during the moment that he 
was rubbing his eyes and getting his bearings—and 
then it disappeared and he recognized that the 
Colonel’s inspiring talk had been influencing his 
dreams. Fatigue had made him sleep late; when he 
entered the sitting-room he noticed that the old 
haircloth sofa was absent; when he sat down to 
breakfast the Colonel tossed six or seven dollars in 
bills on the table, counted them over, said he was 
a little short and must call upon his banker; then 
returned the bills to his wallet with the indifferent 
air of a man who is used to money. ‘The breakfast 
was not an improvement upon the supper, but the 
Colonel talked it up and transformed it into an 
oriental feast. By and by, he said: 

‘“‘T intend to look out for you, Washington, my 
boy. I hunted up a place for you yesterday, but 
{ am not referring to that, now—that is a mere 
livelihood—mere bread and butter; but when I say 
I mean to look out for you I mean something very 
different. I mean to put things in your way that 
will make a mere livelihood a trifling thing. Ill put 
you in a way to make more money than you'll ever 
know what to do with. You'll be right here where 

75 


MARK TWAIN 


I can put my hand on you when anything turns up. 
I’ve got some prodigious operations on foot; but 
I’m keeping quiet; mum’s the word; your old hand 
don’t go around powwowing and letting everybody 
see his k’yards and find out his little game. But 
all in good time, Washington, all in good time. 
You'll see. Now, there’s an operation in corn that 
looks well. Some New York men are trying to get 
me to go into it—buy up all the growing crops and 
just boss the market when they mature—ah, I tell 
you it’s a great thing. And it only costs a trifle; 
two millions or two and a half will doit. I haven’t 
exactly promised yet—there’s no hurry—the more 
indifferent I seem, you know, the more anxious 
those fellows will get. And then there is the hog 
speculation—that’s bigger still. We've got quiet men 
at work,’’ [he was very impressive here,] ‘‘mousing 
around, to get propositions out of all the farmers in 
the whole West and Northwest for the hog crop, and 
other agents quietly getting propositions and terms 
out of all the manufactories—and don’t you see, if 
we can get all the hogs and all the slaughter-houses 
into our hands on the dead quiet—whew! it would 
take three ships to carry the money. I’ve looked 
into the thing—calculated all the chances for and 
all the chances against, and though I shake my head 
and hesitate and keep on thinking, apparently, I’ve 
got my mind made up that if the thing can be done 
on a capital of six millions, that’s the horse to put 
up money on! Why, Washington—but what’s the 
use of talking about it—any man can see that 
there’s whole Atlantic oceans of cash in it, gulfs and 
76 


THE GILDED AGE 


bays thrown in. But there’s a bigger thing than 
that, yet—a bigger—”’ 

“Why, Colonel, you can’t want anything bigger!’’ 
said Washington, his eyes blazing. ‘‘Oh, I wish I 
could go into either of those speculations—I only wish 
I had money—I wish I wasn’t cramped and kept 
down and fettered with poverty, and such prodigious 
chances lying right here in sight! Oh, it is a fearful 
thing to be poor. But don’t throw away those 
things—they are so splendid and I can see how sure 
they are. Don’t throw them away for something 
still better and maybe fail init! I-wouldn’t, Colonel. 
I would stick to these. I wish father were here and 
were his old self again. Oh, he never in his life had 
such chances as these are. Colonel, you can’t im- 
prove on these—no man can improve on them!” 

A sweet, compassionate smile played about the 
Colonel’s features, and he leaned over the table with 
the air of a man who is ‘‘going to show you”’ and 
do it without the least trouble: 

‘““Why Washington, my boy, these things are 
nothing. They look large—of course they look large 
to a novice, but to a man who has been all his life 
accustomed to large operations—shaw! ‘They’re 
well enough to while away an idle hour with, or 
furnish a bit of enjoyment that will give a trifle of 
idle capital a chance to earn its bread while it is 
waiting for something to do, but—now just listen a 
moment—just let me give you an idea of what we 
old veterans of commerce call ‘business.’ Here’s 
the Rothschilds’ proposition—this is between you 
and me, you understand—”’ 

77 


MARK TWAIN 


Washington nodded three or four times impa- 
tiently, and his glowing eyes said, ‘‘Yes, yes— 
hurry—I understand—”’ 

‘‘—for I wouldn’t have it get out for a fortune. 
They want me to go in with them on the sly— 
agent was here two weeks ago about it—go in on 
the sly”’ [voice down to an impressive whisper, now] 
“‘and buy up a hundred and thirteen wildcat banks 
in Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky, Illinois, and Missouri— 
notes of these banks are at all sorts of discount now 
—average discount of the hundred and thirteen is 
forty-four per cent.—buy them all up, you see, and 
then all of a sudden let the cat out of the bag! 
Whiz! the stock of every one of those wildcats would 
spin up to a tremendous premium before you could 
turn a handspring—profit on the speculation not 
a dollar less than forty millions!’ [An eloquent 
pause, while the marvelous vision settled into W.’s 
focus.] ‘‘Where’s your hogs now! Why, my dear 
innocent boy, we would just sit down on the front 
doorsteps and peddle banks like lucifer matches!’’ 

Washington finally got his breath and said: 

‘‘Oh, it is perfectly wonderful! Why couldn’t 
these things have happened in father’s day? And 
I—it’s of no use—they simply lie before my face 
and mock me. There is nothing for me but to 
stand helpless and see other people reap the aston- 
ishing harvest.”’ 

‘‘Never mind, Washington, don’t you worry. T’ll 
fix you. There’s plenty of chances. How much 
money have you got?” 

In the presence of so many millions, Washington 

78 


THE GILDED AGE 


could not keep from blushing when he had to confess 
that he had eighteen dollars in the world. 

‘‘Well, all right—don’t despair. Other people 
have been obliged to begin with less. I have a 
small idea that may develop into something for us 
both, all in good time. Keep your money close 
and add to it. Jl make it breed. I’ve been ex- 
perimenting (to pass away the time) on a little 
preparation for curing sore eyes—a kind of decoc- 
tion nine-tenths water and the other tenth drugs 
that don’t cost more than a dollar a barrel; I’m 
still experimenting; there’s one ingredient wanted 
yet to perfect the thing, and somehow I can’t just 
manage to hit upon the thing that’s necessary, and I 
don’t dare talk with a chemist, of course. But I’m 
progressing, and before many weeks I wager the 
country will ring with the fame of Beriah Sellers’s 
Infallible Imperial Oriental Optic Liniment and 
Salvation for Sore Eyes—the Medical Wonder of 
the Age! Small bottles fifty cents, large ones a 
dollar. Average cost, five and seven cents for the 
two sizes. The first year sell, say, ten thousand 
bottles in Missouri, seven thousand in Iowa, three 
thousand in Arkansas, four thousand in Kentucky, 
six thousand in Illinois, and say twenty-five thousand 
in the rest of the country. Total, fifty-five thou- 
sand bottles; profit clear of all expenses, twenty 
thousand dollars at the very lowest calculation. All 
the capital needed is to manufacture the first two 
thousand bottles—say a hundred and fifty dollars— 
then the money would begin to flow in. The 
second year, sales would reach two hundred thousand 

79 


MARK TWAIN 


bottles—clear profit, say seventy-five thousand dol- 
lars—and in the mean time the great factory would 
be building in St. Louis, to cost, say, one hundred 
thousand dollars. The third year we could easily 
sell one million bottles in the United States and—”’ 

‘‘O, splendid!’ said Washington. ‘‘Let’s com- 
mence right away—let’s—”’ 

‘‘—one million bottles in the United States— 
profit at least three hundred and fifty thousand 
dollars—and then it would begin to be time to turn 
our attention toward the real idea of the business.”’ 

““The real idea of it! Ain’t three hundred and 
fifty thousand dollars a year a pretty real—”’ 

“Stuff! Why, what an infant you are, Washing- 
ton—what a guileless, short-sighted, easily contented 
innocent you are, my poor little country-bred know- 
nothing! Would I go to all that trouble and bother 
for the poor crumbs a body might pick up in this 
country? Now do I look like a man who—does 
my history suggest that I am a man who deals in 
trifles, contents himself with the narrow horizon that 
hems in the common herd, sees no further than the 
end of his nose? Now, you know that that is not 
me—couldn’t be me. You ought to know that if I 
throw my time and abilities into a patent medicine, 
it’s a patent medicine whose field of operations is 
the solid earth! its clients the swarming nations that 
inhabit it! Why what is the republic of America 
for an eye-water country? Lord bless you, it is 
nothing but a barren highway that you’ve got to 
cross to get to the true eye-water market! Why, 
Washington, in the Oriental countries people swarm 

80 


tre GuLDED AGE 


like the sands of the desert; every square mile of 
ground upholds its thousands upon thousands of 
struggling human creatures—and every separate 
and individual devil of them’s got the ophthalmia! 
It’s as natural to them as noses are—and sin. It’s 
born with them, it stays with them, it’s all that 
some of them have left when they die. Three years 
of introductory trade in the Orient and what will 
be the result? Why, our headquarters would be in 
Constantinople and our hindquarters in Further 
India! Factories and warehouses in Cairo, Ispahan, 
Bagdad, Damascus, Jerusalem, Yedo, Peking, Bang- 
kok, Delhi, Bombay, and Calcutta! Annual income 
—well, God only knows how many millions and 
millions apiece!” 

Washington was so dazed, so bewildered—his 
heart and his eyes had wandered so far away among 
the strange lands beyond the seas, and such ava- 
lanches of coin and currency had fluttered and jingled 
confusedly down before him, that he was now as 
one who has been whirling round and round for a 
time, and, stopping all at once, finds his surround- 
ings still whirling and all objects a dancing chaos. 
However, little by little the Sellers family cooled 
down and crystallized into shape, and the poor room 
lost its glitter and resumed its poverty. Then the 
youth found his voice and begged Sellers to drop 
everything and hurry up the eye-water; and he got 
his eighteen dollars and tried to force it upon the 
Colonel—pleaded with him to take it—implored him 
to doit. But the Colonel would not; said he would 
not need the capital (in his native magnificent way 

81 


MARK TWAIN 


he called that eighteen dollars capital) till the eye- 
water was an accomplished fact. He made Wash- 
ington easy in his mind, though, by promising that 
he would call for it just as soon as the invention was 
finished, and he added the glad tidings that nobody 
but just they two should be admitted to a share 
in the speculation. 

When Washington left the breakfast-table he 
could have worshiped that man. Washington was 
one of that kind of people whose hopes are in the 
very clouds one day, and in the gutter the next. 
He walked on air, now. The Colonel was ready to 
take him around and introduce him to the employ- 
ment he had found for him, but Washington begged 
for a few moments in which to write home; with his 
kind of people, to ride to-day’s new interest to death 
and put off yesterday’s till another time, is nature 
itself. He ran up-stairs and wrote glowingly, en- 
thusiastically, to his mother about the hogs and the 
corn, the banks and the eye-water—and added a 
few inconsequential millions to each project. And he 
said that people little dreamed what a man Colonel 
Sellers was, and that the world would open its eyes 
when it found out. And he closed his letter thus: 


So make yourself perfectly easy, mother —in a little while 
you shall have everything you want,and more. Iam not likely 
to stint you in anything, I fancy. -This money will not be for 
me, alone, but for all of us. I want all to share alike; and there 
is going to be far more for each than one person can spend. 
Break it to father cautiously —you understand the need of that— 
break it to him cautiously, for he has had such cruel hard for- 
tune, and is so stricken by it that great good news might prostrate 
him more surely than even bad, for he is used to the bad but iS 


82 


THE GILDED AGE 


grown sadly unaccustomed to the other. Tell Laura—tell all 
the children. And write to Clay about it if he is not with you 
yet. You may tell Clay that whatever I get he can freely share 
in—freely. He knows that that is true—there will be no need 
that I should swear to that to make him believe it. Good-by 
—and mind what I say: Rest perfectly easy, one and all of you, 
for our troubles are nearly at an end. 


Poor lad, he could not know that his mother would 
cry some loving, compassionate tears over his letter 
and put off the family with a synopsis of its con- 
tents which conveyed a deal of love to them but not 
much idea of his prospects or projects. And he 
never dreamed that such a joyful letter could 
sadden her and fill her night with sighs, and troubled 
thoughts, and bodings of the future, instead of fill- 
ing it with peace and blessing it with restful sleep. 

When the letter was done, Washington and the 
Colonel sallied forth, and as they walked along 
Washington learned what he was to be. He was to 
be a clerk in a real-estate office. Instantly the fickle 
youth’s dreams forsook the magic eye-water and 
flew back to the Tennessee Land. And the gor- 
geous possibilities of that great domain straightway 
began to occupy his imagination to'such a degree 
that he could scarcely manage to keep even enough 
of his attention upon the Colonel’s talk to retain 
the general run of what he was saying. He was 
glad it was a real-estate office—he was a made 
man now, sure. 

The Colonel said that General Boswell was a rich 
man and had a good and growing business; and that 
Washington’s work would be light and he would 
get forty dollars a month and be boarded and lodged 


53 


MARK TWAIN 


in the General’s family—which was as good as ten 
dollars more; and even better, for he could not live 
as well even at the ‘‘City Hotel’’ as he would 
there, and yet the hotel charged fifteen dollars a. 
month whereamanhadagoodroom. — 

General Boswell was in his office; a comfortable- 
looking place, with plenty of outline maps hanging 
about the walls and in the windows, and a spectacled 
man was marking out another one on a long table. 
The office was in the principal street. The General 
received Washington with a kindly but reserved 
politeness. Washington rather liked his looks. He 
was about fifty years old, dignified, well preserved, 
and well dressed. After the Colonel took his leave, 
the General talked awhile with Washington — his 
talk consisting chiefly of instructions about the 
clerical duties of the place. He seemed satisfied as 
to Washington’s ability to take care of the books, 
he was evidently a pretty fair theoretical bookkeeper, 
and experience would soon harden theory into prac- 
tice. By and by dinner-time came, and the two 
walked to the General’s house; and now Washington 
noticed an instinct in himself that moved him to 
keen not in the General’s rear, exactly, but yet not 
at his side—somehow the old gentleman’s dignity 
and reserve did not inspire familiarity. 


CHSPTER IX 


SQUIRE HAWKINS DIES, LEAVING LANDS TO HIS 
CHILDREN 


Quando ti veddi per la prima volta, 
Parse che mi s’aprisse il paradiso, 
E venissano gli angioli a un per volta 
Tutti ad apporsi sopra al tuo bel viso, 
Tutti ad apporsi sopra il tuo bel volto; 
M’incatenasti, e non mi so’anco sciolto— 
J. Caselli, Chants popul. de l’Italie, 21. 


Yomohmi hoka, himak a yakni iloppvt immi ha chi ho— 
—Tajma kittérnaminut innéiziungnzrame, isikkene sinik- 


bingmun illiéj, annerningzrdlunilo siurdliminut piok. 
Mos. Agl. Swurdl. 49.32. 


ASHINGTON dreamed his way along the 

street, his fancy flitting from grain to hogs, 
from hogs to banks, from banks to eye-water, from 
eye-water to Tennessee Land, and lingering but a 
feverish moment upon each of these fascinations. 
He was conscious of but one outward thing, to wit, 
the General, and he was really not vividly conscious 
of him. 

Arrived at the finest dwelling in the town, they 
entered it and were at home. Washington was in- 
troduced to Mrs. Boswell, and his imagination was 
on the point of flitting into the vapory realms of 

85 


MARK TWAIN 


speculation again, when a lovely girl of sixteen or 
seventeen came in. This vision swept Washington’s 
mind clear of its chaos of glittering rubbish in an 
instant. Beauty had fascinated him before; many 
times he had been in love—even for weeks at a 
time with the same subject—but his heart had never 
suffered so sudden and so fierce an assault as this, 
within his recollection. 

Louise Boswell occupied his mind and drifted 
among his multiplication tables all the afternoon. 
He was constantly catching himself in a reverie— 
reveries made up of recalling how she looked when 
she first burst upon him; how her voice thrilled him 
when she first spoke; how charmed the very air 
seemed by her presence. Blissful as the afternoon 
was, delivered up to such a revel as this, it seemed 
an eternity, so impatient was he to see the girl 
again. Other afternoons like it followed. Washing- 
ton plunged into this love affair as he plunged into 
everything else—upon impulse and without reflec- 
tion. As the days went by it seemed plain that he 
was growing in favor with Louise—not sweepingly 
so, but yet perceptibly, he fancied. His attentions 
to her troubled her father and mother a little, and 
they warned Louise, without stating particulars or 
making allusions to any special person, that a girl 
was sure to make a mistake who allowed herself to 
marry anybody but a man who could support her 
well. 

Some instinct taught Washington that his present 
lack of money would be an obstruction, though pos- 
sibly not a bar, to his hopes, and straightway his 

86 


THE GILDED AGE 


poverty became a torture to him which cast all his 
former sufferings under that head into the shade. 
He longed for riches now as he had never longed for 
them before. 

He had been once or twice to dine with Colonel 
Sellers, and had been discouraged to note that the 
Colonel’s bill of fare was falling off both in quantity 
and quality—a sign, he feared, that the lacking 
ingredient in the eye-water still remained undiscov- 
ered—though Sellers always explained that these 
changes in the family diet had been ordered by the 
doctor, or suggested by some new scientific work 
the Colonel had stumbled upon. But it always 
turned out that the lacking ingredient was still lack- 
ing—though it always appeared, at the same time, 
that the Colonel was right on its heels. 

Every time the Colonel came into the real-estate 
office Washington’s heart bounded and his eyes 
lighted with hope, but it always turned out that the 
Colonel was merely on the scent of some vast, unde- 
fined landed speculation—although he was custom- 
arily able to say that he was nearer to the all- 
necessary ingredient than ever, and could almost 
name the hour when success would dawn. And 
then Washington’s heart would sink again, and a 
sigh would tell when it touched bottom. 

About this time a letter came, saying that Judge 
Hawkins had been ailing for a fortnight, and was 
now considered to be seriously ill. It was thought 
best that Washington should come home. The 
news filled him with grief, for he loved and honored 
his father; the Boswells were touched by the youth’s 

87 


MARK TWAIN 


sorrow, and even the General unbent and said en- 
couraging things to him. ‘There was balm in this; 
but when Louise bade him good -by, and shook his 
hand and said, ‘‘Don’t be cast down—it will all 
come out right—I know it will all come out right,” 
it seemed a blessed thing to be in misfortune, and 
the tears that welled up to his eyes were the messen- 
gers of an adoring and a grateful heart; and when the 
girl saw them and answering tears came into her 
own eyes, Washington could hardly contain the excess 
of happiness that poured into the cavities of his 
breast that were so lately stored to the roof with grief. 

All the way home he nursed his woe and exalted 
it. He pictured himself as she must be picturing 
him: a noble, struggling young spirit persecuted by 
misfortune, but bravely and patiently waiting in the 
shadow of a dread calamity and preparing to meet 
the blow as became one who was all too used to 
hard fortune and the pitiless buffetings of fate. 
These thoughts made him weep, and weep more 
broken-heartedly than ever; and he wished that she 
could see his sufferings now. 

There was nothing significant in the fact that 
Louise, dreamy and distraught, stood at her bed- 
room bureau that night, scribbling ‘‘Washington” 
here and there over a sheet of paper. But there was 
something significant in the fact that she scratched 
the word out every time she wrote it; examined the 
erasure critically to see if anybody could guess at 
what the word had been; then buried it under a 
maze of obliterating lines; and, finally, as if still 
unsatisfied, burned the paper. 

88 


THE GILDED AGE 


When Washington reached home, he recognized 
at once how serious his father’s case was. ‘The 
darkened room, the labored breathing and occasional 
moanings of the patient, the tiptoeing of the at- 
tendants and their whispered consultations, were 
full of sad meaning. For three or four nights Mrs. 
Hawkins and Laura had been watching by the bed- 
side; Clay had arrived, preceding Washington by 
one day, and he was now added to the corps of 
watchers. Mr. Hawkins would have none but these 
three, though neighborly assistance was offered by 
old friends. From this time forth three-hour watches 
were instituted, and day and night the watchers 
kept their vigils. By degrees Laura and her mother 
began to show wear, but neither of them would 
yield a minute of their tasks to Clay. He ventured 
once to let the midnight hour pass without calling 
Laura, but he ventured no more; there was that 
about her rebuke when he tried to explain, that 
taught him that to let her sleep when she might be 
ministering to her father’s needs, was to rob her of 
moments that were priceless in her eyes; he per- 
ceived that she regarded it as a privilege to watch, 
not a burden. . And he had noticed, also, that when 
midnight struck, the patient turned his eyes toward 
the door, with an expectancy in them which pres- 
ently grew into a longing but brightened into con- 
tentment as soon as the door opened and Laura 
appeared. And he did not need Laura’s rebuke 
when he heard his father say: 

“Clay is good, and you are tired, poor child; but 
I wanted you so.” 


89 


MARK TWAIN 


“Clay is not good, father—he did not call me. 
I would not have treated him so. How could you 
do it, Clay?” 

Clay begged forgiveness and promised not to 
break faith again; and as he betook him to his bed, 
he said to himself, ‘‘It’s a steadfast little soul; 
whoever thinks he is doing the Duchess a kindness 
by intimating that she is not sufficient for any 
undertaking she puts her hand to, makes a mistake; 
and if I did not know it before, I know now that 
there are surer ways of pleasing her than by trying 
to lighten her labor when that labor consists in 
wearing herself out for the sake of a person she 
loves.” 

A week drifted by, and all the while the patient 
sank lower and lower. The night drew on that was 
to end all suspense. It was a wintry one. The 
darkness gathered, the snow was falling, the wind 
wailed plaintively about the house or shook it with 
fitful gusts. The doctor had paid his last visit and 
gone away with that dismal remark to the nearest 
friend of the family that he ‘‘ believed there was 
nothing more that he could do”—a remark which 
is always overheard by some one it is not meant 
for and strikes a lingering half-conscious hope dead 
with a withering shock; the medicine vials had been 
removed from the bedside and put out of sight, and 
all things made orderly and meet for the solemn 
event that was impending; the patient, with closed 
eyes, lay scarcely breathing; the watchers sat by 
and wiped the gathering damps from his forehead 
while the silent tears flowed down their faces; the 

go 


Tre “GiLDED AGE 


deep hush was only interrupted by sobs from the 
children, grouped about the bed. 

After a time—it was toward midnight now— 
Mr. Hawkins roused out of a doze, looked about 
him and was evidently trying to speak. Instantly 
Laura lifted his head, and in a failing voice he said, 
while something of the old light shone in his eyes: 

‘Wife — children — come nearer—nearer. The 
darkness grows. Let me see you all, once more.” 

The group closed together at the bedside, and 
their tears and sobs came now without restraint. 

‘‘T am leaving you in cruel poverty. J have been 
—so foolish—so short-sighted. But courage! A 
better day is—is coming. Never lose sight of the 
Tennessee Land! Bewary. ‘There is wealth stored 
up for you there—wealth that is boundless! The 
children shall hold up their heads with the best in 
the land, yet. Where are the papers? Have you 
got the papers safe? Show them—show them 
to me!” 

Under his strong excitement his voice had gath- 
ered power and his last sentences were spoken with 
scarcely a perceptible halt or hindrance. With an 
effort he had raised himself almost without assistance 
to a sitting posture. But now the fire faded out of 
his eyes and he fell back exhausted. The papers 
were brought and held before him, and the answer- 
ing smile that flitted across his face showed that he 
was satisfied. He closed his eyes, and the signs of 
approaching dissolution multiplied rapidly. He lay 
almost motionless for a little while, then suddenly 
partly raised his head and looked about him as 

QI 


MARK TWAIN 


one who peers into a dim uncertain light. He mut- 
tered : 

‘‘Gone? No—TI see you—still. It is—it is— 
over. But you are—safe. Safe. The Ten—” 

_ The voice died out in a whisper; the sentence was 
never finished. The emaciated fingers began to 
pick at the coverlet, a fatal sign. After a time 
there were no sounds but the cries of the mourners 
within and the gusty turmoil of the wind without. 
Laura had bent down and kissed her father’s lips as 
the spirit left the body; but she did not sob, or 
utter any ejaculation; her tears flowed silently. 
Then she closed the dead eyes, and crossed the 
hands upon the breast; after a season, she kissed 
the forehead reverently, drew the sheet up over the 
face, and then walked apart and sat down with the 
look of one who is done with life and has no further 
interest in its joys and sorrows, its hopes or its 
ambitions. Clay buried his face in the coverlet of 
the bed; when the other children and the mother 
realized that death was indeed come at last, they 
threw themselves into each other’s arms and gave 
way to a frenzy of grief. 


CHAPTER X 
LAURA'S DISCOVERY. MRS. HAWKINS’S APPEAL 


—Okarbigalo: ‘Kia pannigatit? Assarsara! uamnut nevsoin- 


9? 
goama “— 
Mo. Agleg. Sturdl. 24.23. 


Nootah nuttaunes, natwontash, 
Kukkeihtash, wonk yeuyeu 
Wannanum kummissinninnumog 
Kah Koosh week pannuppu. 


—La Giannetta rispose: Madama, voi dalla poverta di mio 
padre togliendomi, come figliuola cresciuta m’avete, e per questo 
agni vostro piacer far dovrei— 

Boccacto, Decam. Giorno 2, Nov. 8. 


NLY two or three days had elapsed since the 

funeral, when something happened which was 
to change the drift of Laura’s life somewhat, and 
influence in a greater or lesser degree the formation 
of her character. 

Major Lackland had once been a man of note in 
the state—a man of extraordinary natural ability 
and as extraordinary learning. He had been uni- 
versally trusted and honored in his day, but had 
finally fallen into misfortune; while serving his third 
term in Congress, and while upon the point of being 
elevated to the Senate—which was considered the 
summit of earthly aggrandizement in those days— 
he had yielded to temptation, when in distress for 

93 


MARK TWAIN 


money wherewith to save his estate, and sold his 
vote. His crime was discovered, and his fall fol- 
lowed instantly. Nothing could reinstate him in the 
confidence of the people, his ruin was irretrievable 
—his disgrace complete. All doors were closed 
against him, all men avoided him. After years of 
skulking retirement and dissipation, death had re- 
lieved him of his troubles at last, and his funeral 
followed close upon that of Mr. Hawkins. He died 
as he had latterly lived—wholly alone and friend- 
less. He had no relatives—or if he had they did not 
acknowledge him. The coroner’s jury found certain 
memoranda upon his body and about the premises 
which revealed a fact not suspected by the villagers 
before—viz., that Laura was not the child of Mr. 
and Mrs. Hawkins. 

The gossips were soon at work. They were but 
little hampered by the fact that the memoranda re- 
ferred to betrayed nothing but the bare circumstance 
that Laura’s real parents were unknown, and stopped 
there. So far from being hampered by this, the 
gossips seemed to gain all the more freedom from 
it. They supplied all the missing information them- 
selves, they filled up all the blanks. The town soon 
teemed with histories of Laura’s origin and secret 
history, no two versions precisely alike, but all 
elaborate, exhaustive, mysterious, and interesting, 
and all agreeing in one vital particular—to wit, that 
there was a suspicious cloud about her birth, not to 
say a disreputable one. 

Laura began to encounter cold looks, ateneen eyes, 
and peculiar nods and gestures which perplexed her 

94 


THE GILDED AGE 


beyond measure; but presently the pervading gossip 
found its way to her, and she understood them then. 
Her pride was stung. She was astonished, and at 
first incredulous. She was about to ask her mother 
if there was any truth in these reports, but upon 
second thought held her peace. She soon gathered 
that Major Lackland’s memoranda seemed to refer 
to letters which had passed between himself and 
Judge Hawkins. She shaped her course without 
difficulty the day that that hint reached her. 

That night she sat in her room till all was still, 
and then she stole into the garret and began a search. 
She rummaged long among boxes of musty papers 
relating to business matters of no interest to her, 
but at last she found several bundles of letters. 
One bundle was marked ‘‘private,’’ and in that she 
found what she wanted. She selected six or eight 
letters from the package and began to devour their 
contents, heedless of the cold. 

By the dates, these letters were from five to 
seven years old. They were all from Major Lack- 
land to Mr. Hawkins. The substance of them was, 
that some one in the East had been inquiring of 
Major Lackland about a lost child and its parents, 
and that it was conjectured that the child might be 
Laura. 

Evidently some of the letters were missing, for 
the name of the inquirer was not mentioned; there 
was a casual reference to ‘‘this handsome-featured 
aristocratic gentleman,” as if the reader and the 
writer were accustomed to speak of him and knew 
who was meant. 

95 


MARK TWAIN 


In one letter the Major said he agreed with Mr. 
Hawkins that the inquirer seemed not altogether on 
the wrong track; but he also agreed that it would 
be best to keep quiet until more convincing develop- 
ments were forthcoming. 

Another letter said that ‘“‘the poor soul broke 
completely down when he saw Laura’s picture, and 
declared it must be she.”’ 

Still another said: 


He seems entirely alone in the world, and his heart is so 
wrapped up in this thing that I believe that if it proved a false 
hope, it would kill him; I have persuaded him to wait a little 
while and go West when I go. 


Another letter had this paragraph in it: 


He is better one day and worse the next, and is out of his 
mind a good deal of the time. Lately his case has developed a 
something which is a wonder to the hired nurses, but which will 
not be much of a marvel to you if you have read medical phil- 
osophy much. It is this: his lost memory returns to him when 
he is delirious, and goes away again when he is himself—just 
as old Canada Joe used to talk the French patois of his boyhood 
in the delirium of typhus fever, though he could not do it when 
his mind was clear. Now this poor gentleman’s memory has 
always broken down before he reached the explosion of the 
steamer; he could only remember starting up the river with his 
wife and child, and he had an idea that there was a race, but 
he was not certain; he could not name the boat he was on; 
there was a dead blank of a month or more that supplied not 
an item to his recollection. It was not for me to assist him, of 
course. But now in his delirium zt all comes out: the names of 
the boats, every incident of the explosion, and likewise the 
details of his astonishing escape—that is, up to where, just as 
a yawl-boat was approaching him (he was clinging to the star- 
board wheel of the burning wreck at the time), a falling timber 
struck him on the head. But I will write out his wonderful 


96 


Pe GILDED AGE 


escape in full to-morrow or next day. Of course the physicians 
will not let me tell him now that our Laura is indeed his child 
—that must come later, when his health is thoroughly restored. 
His case is not considered dangerous at all; he will recover pres- 
ently, the doctors say. But they insist that he must travel a 
little when he gets well—they recommend a short sea-voyage, 
and they say he can be persuaded to try it if we continue to keep 

im in ignorance and promise to let him see L. as soon as he 
returns. 

The letter that bore the latest date of all, con- 
tained this clause: 

It is the most unaccountable thing in the world; the mystery 
remains as impenetrable as ever; I have hunted high and low 
for him, and inquired of everybody, but in vain; all trace of him 
ends at that hotel in New York; I never have seen or heard of 
him since, up to this day; he could hardly have sailed, for his 
name does not appear upon the books of any shipping office in 
New York or Boston or Baltimore. How fortunate it seems, 
now, that we kept this thing to ourselves; Laura still has a 
father in you, and it is better for her that we drop this subject 
here forever. 

That was all. Random remarks here and there, 
being pieced together gave Laura a vague impression 
of a man of fine presence, about forty-three or forty- 
five years of age, with dark hair and eyes, and a 
slight limp in his walk—it was not stated which leg 
was defective. And this indistinct shadow repre- 
sented her father. She made an exhaustive search 
for the missing letters, but found none. They had 
probably been burned; and she doubted not that the 
ones she had ferreted out would have shared the 
same fate if Mr. Hawkins had not been a dreamer, 
void of method, whose mind was perhaps in a state 
of conflagration over some bright new speculation 
when he received them. 


97 


MARK TWAIN 


She sat long, with the letters in her lap, thinking 
—and unconsciously freezing. She felt like a lost 
person who has traveled down a long lane in good 
hope of escape, and, just as the night descends 
finds his progress barred by a bridgeless river whose 
further shore, if it has one, is lost in the darkness. 
If she could only have found these letters a month 
sooner! ‘That was her thought. But now the dead 
had carried their secrets with them. A dreary 
melancholy settled down upon her. An undefined 
sense of injury crept into her heart. She grew very 
miserable. 

She had just reached the romantic age—the age 
when there is a sad sweetness, a dismal comfort to 
a girl to find out that there is a mystery connected 
with her birth, which no other piece of good luck 
can afford. She had more than her rightful share 
of practical good sense, but still she was human; 
and to be human is to have one’s little modicum of 
romance secreted away in one’s composition. One 
never ceases to make a hero of one’s self (in private), 
during life, but only alters the style of his heroism 
from time to time as the drifting years belittle 
certain gods of his admiration and raise up others 
in their stead that seem greater. 

The recent wearing days and nights of watching, 
and the wasting grief that had possessed her, com- 
bined with the profound depression that naturally 
came with the reaction of idleness, made Laura 
peculiarly susceptible at this time to romantic 1im- 
pressions. She was a heroine, now, with a mysteri- 
ous father somewhere. She could not really tell 

98 


THE GYLDED AGE 


whether she wanted to find him and spoil it all or 
not; but still all the traditions of romance pointed 
to the making the attempt as the usual and neces- 
sary course to follow; therefore she would some day 
begin the search when opportunity should offer. 

Now a former thought struck her—she would 
speak to Mrs. Hawkins. And,, naturally enough, 
Mrs. Hawkins appeared on the stage at that moment. 

She said she knew all—she knew that Laura had 
discovered the secret that Mr. Hawkins, the elder 
children, Colonel Sellers, and herself had kept so long 
and so faithfully; and she cried and said that now 
that troubles had begun they would never end; her 
daughter’s love would wean itself away from her and 
her heart would break. Her grief so wrought upon 
Laura that the girl almost forgot her own troubles 
for the moment in her compassion for her mother’s 
distress. Finally Mrs. Hawkins said: 

‘““Speak to me, child—do not forsake me. For- 
get all this miserable talk. Say I am your mother! 
—I have loved you so long, and there is no other. 
I am your mother, in the sight of God, and nothing 
shall ever take you from me!”’ 

All barriers fell, before this appeal. Laura put 
her arms about her mother’s neck and said: 

“You are my mother, and always shall be. We 
will be as we have always been; and neither this 
foolish talk nor any other things shall part us or 
make us less to each other than we are this hour.”’ 

There was no longer any sense of separation or 
estrangement between them. Indeed, their love 
seemed more perfect now than it had ever been 

99 


MARK TWAIN 


before. By and by they went down-stairs and sat by 
the fire and talked long and earnestly about Laura’s 
history and the letters. But it transpired that Mrs. 
Hawkins had never known of this correspondence 
between her husband and Major Lackland. With 
his usual consideration for his wife, Mr. Hawkins 
had shielded her from the worry the matter would 
have caused her. 

Laura went to bed at last with a mind that had 
gained largely in tranquillity and had lost corre- 
spondingly in morbid romantic exaltation. She was 
pensive, the next day, and subdued; but that was 
not matter for remark, for she did not differ from 
the mournful friends about her in that respect. 
Clay and Washington were the same loving and 
admiring brothers now that they had always been. 
The great secret was new to some of the younger 
children, but their love suffered no change under the 
wonderful revelation. 

It is barely possible that things might have pres- 
ently settled down into their old rut and the mystery 
have lost the bulk of its romantic sublimity in Laura’s 
eyes, if the village gossips could have quieted down. 
But they could not quiet down and they did not. 
Day after day they called at the house, ostensibly 
upon visits of condolence, and they pumped away at 
the mother and the children without seeming to 
know that their questionings were in bad taste. 
They meant no harm—they only wanted to know. 
Villagers always want to know. 

The family fought shy of the questionings, and of 
course that was high testimony—‘‘if the Duchess 

roo 


THE GILDED AGE 


was respectably born, why didn’t they come out 
and prove it?’—why did they stick to that poor thin 
story about picking her up out of a steamboat ex- 
plosion?”’ 

Under this ceaseless persecution, Laura’s morbid 
self-communing was renewed. At night the day’s 
contribution of detraction, innuendo, and malicious 
conjecture would be canvassed in her mind, and 
then she would drift into a course of thinking. As 
her thoughts ran on, the indignant tears would spring 
to her eyes, and she would spit out fierce little ejacu- 
lations at intervals. But finally she would grow 
calmer and say some comforting disdainful thing— 
something like this: 

‘‘But who are they? Animals! What are their 
opinions to me? Let them talk—TI will not stoop 
to be affected by it. I could hate— Nonsense— 
nobody I care for or in any way respect is changed 
toward me, I fancy.” 

She may have supposed she was thinking of many 
individuals, but it was not so—she was thinking of 
only one. And her heart warmed somewhat, too, 
the while. One day a friend overheard a conversa- 
tion like this, and naturally came and told her all 
about it: 

“Ned, they say you don’t go there any more. 
How is that?” 

‘Well, I don’t: but I tell you it’s not because I 
don’t want ,to and it’s not because J think it is any 
matter who her father was or who he wasn’t either; 
it’s only on account of this talk, talk, talk. I think 
she is a fine girl every way, and so would you if you 

IO! 


MARK TWAIN 


knew her as well as I do; but you know how it is 
when a girl once gets talked about—it’s al]l up with 
her—the world won’t ever let her alone, after that.’’ 

The only comment Laura made upon this revela- 
tion, was: 

‘“Then it appears that if this trouble had not oc- 
curred I could have had the happiness of Mr. Ned 
Thurston’s serious attentions. He is well favored in 
person, and well liked, too, I believe, and comes of 
one of the first families of the village. He is pros- 
perous, too, [ hear; has been a doctor a year, now, 
and has had two patients—no, three, I think; yes, 
it was three. I attended their funerals. Well, 
other people have hoped and been disappointed; I 
am not alone in that. I wish you could stay to 
dinner, Maria—we are going to have sausages; 
and besides, I wanted to talk to you about Hawkeye 
and make you promise to come and see us when we 
are settled there.” - 

But Maria could not stay. She had come to 
mingle romantic tears with Laura’s over the lover’s 
defection, and had found herself dealing with a heart 
that could not rise to an appreciation of affliction 
because its interest was all centered in sausages. 

But as soon as Maria was gone, Laura stamped 
her expressive foot and said: 

“The coward! Are all books lies? I thought 
he would fly to the front, and be brave and noble, 
and stand up for me against all the world, and defy 
my enemies, and wither these gossips with his scorn! 
Poor crawling thing, let him go. I do begin to 
despise this world!” 

I02 


THE GILDED AGE 


She lapsed into thought. Presently she said: 

“Tf the time ever comes, and I get a chance, 
oh, T1l—” 

She could not find a word that was strong enough, 
perhaps. By and by she said: 

‘Well, I am glad of it—I’m glad of it. I never 
cared anything for him anyway!” 

And then, with small consistency, she cried a little, 
and patted her foot more indignantly than ever. 


CHAPTER XI 


A DINNER PARTY. PLAIN FARE, BRILLIANT 
EXPECTATIONS 


SRABEHdERS 4 


WO months had gone by and the Hawkins 

family were domiciled in Hawkeye. Washing- 
ton was at work in the real-estate office again, and 
was alternately in paradise or the other place just 
as it happened that Louise was gracious to him or 
seemingly indifferent—because indifference or pre- 
occupation could mean nothing else than that she 
was thinking of some other young person. Colonel 
wellers had asked him several times to dine with 
him, when he first returned to Hawkeye, but Wash- 
ington, for no particular reason, had not accepted. 
No particular reason except one which he preferred 
to keep to himself—oz., that he could not bear to 
be away from Louise. It occurred to him, now, 
that the Colonel had not invited him lately—could 
he be offended? He resolved to go that very day, 
and give the Colonel a pleasant surprise. It was 
a good idea; especially as Louise had absented her- 
self from breakfast that morning, and torn his 

104 


tee GILDeD AGE 


heart; he would tear hers, now, and let her see how 
it felt. 

The Sellers family were just starting to dinner 
when Washington burst upon them with his surprise. 
For an instant the Colonel looked nonplussed, and 
just a bit uncomfortable; and Mrs. Sellers looked 
actually distressed: but the next moment the head 
of the house was himself again, and exclaimed: 

‘‘All right, my boy, all right—-always glad to see 
you—always glad to hear your voice and take you 
by the hand. Don’t wait for special invitations— 
that’s all nonsense among friends. Just come when- 
ever you can, and come as often as you can—the 
oftener the better. You can’t please us any better 
than that, Washington; the little woman will tell 
you so herself. We don’t pretend to style. Plain 
folks, you know—plain folks. Just a plain family 
dinner, but such as it is, our friends are always 
welcome, I reckon you know that yourself, Wash- 
ington. Run along, children, run along; Lafayette,’ 
stand off the cat’s tail, child, can’t you see what 
you’re doing? Come, come, come, Roderick Dhu, 
it isn’t nice for little boys to hang on to young 
gentlemen’s coat-tails—but never mind him, Wash- 
ington, he’s full of spirits and don’t mean any harm. 

1In those old days the average man called his children after his 
most revered literary and historical idols; consequently there was 
hardly a family, at least in the West, but had a Washington in it— 
and also a Lafayette, a Franklin, and six or eight sounding names 
from Byron, Scott, and the Bible, if the offspring held out. To 
visit such a family, was to find one’s self confronted by a congress 
made up of representatives of the imperial myths and the majestic 


dead of all the ages. There was something thrilling about it, to a 
stranger, not to say awe-inspiring. 


105 


MARK TWAIN 


Children will be children, you know. Take the 
chair next to Mrs. Sellers, Washington—tut, tut, 
Marie Antoinette, let your brother have the fork 
if he wants it, you are bigger than he is.” 

Washington contemplated the banquet, and won- 
dered if he were in his right mind. Was this the 
plain family dinner? And was it all present? It 
was soon apparent that this was indeed the dinner: 
it was all on the table: it consisted of abundance of 
clear, fresh water, and a basin of raw turnips— 
nothing more. 

Washington stole a glance at Mrs. Sellers’s face, 
and would have given the world, the next moment, 
if he could have spared her that. The poor woman’s 
face was crimson, and the tears stood in her eyes. 
Washington did not know what to do. He wished 
he had never come there and spied out this cruel 
poverty and brought pain to that poor little lady’s 
heart and shame to her cheek; but he was there, and 
there was no escape. Colonel Sellers hitched back 
his coat-sleeves airily from his wrists as who should 
say “‘Now for solid enjoyment!’’ seized a fork, 
flourished it and began to harpoon turnips and 
deposit them in the plates before him: 

“Let me help you, Washington—Lafayette, pass 
this plate to Washington—ah, well, well, my boy, 
things are looking pretty bright, now, J tell you. 
Speculation—my! the whole atmosphere’s full of 
money. I wouldn’t take three fortunes for one 
little operation I’ve got on hand now—have any- 
thing from the casters? No? Well, you’re right, 
you’re right. Some people like mustard with tur- 

106 


THE GILDED AGE 


nips, but—now there was Baron Poniatowski—Lord, 
but that man did know how to live!—true Russian 
you know, Russian to the backbone; I say to my 
wife, give me a Russian every time, for a table 
comrade. The Baron used to say, ‘Take mustard, 
Sellers, try the mustard—a man can’t know what 
turnips are in perfection without mustard,’ but I 
always said, ‘No, Baron, I’m a plain man, and I 
want my food plain—none of your embellishments 
for Beriah Sellers—no made dishes for me! And 
it’s the best way—high living kills more than it 
cures in this world, you can rest assured of that. 
Yes, indeed, Washington, I’ve got one little opera- 
tion on hand that—take some more water—help 
yourself, won’t you? help yourself, there’s plenty of 
it. You'll find it pretty good, I guess. How does 
that fruit strike you?”’ 

Washington said he did not know that he had 
ever tasted better. He did not add that he detested 
turnips even when they were cooked—loathed them 
in their natural state. No, he kept this to himself, 
and praised the turnips to the peril of his soul. 

“I thought you’d like them. Examine them— 
examine them—they’ll bear it. See how perfectly 
firm and juicy they are—they can’t start any like 
them in this part of the country, I can tell you. 
These are from New Jersey—I imported them 
myself. They cost like sin, too; but, Lord bless me, 
I go in for having the best of a thing, even if it does 
cost a little more—it’s the best economy, in the 
long run. These are the Early Malcolm—it’s a 
turnip that can’t be produced except in just one 

107 


MARK TWAIN 


orchard, and the supply never is up to the demand. 
Take some more water, Washington—you can’t 
drink too much water with fruit—all the doctors 
say that. The plague can’t come where this article 
is, my boy!” 

“Plague? What plague?” 

‘What plague, indeed? Why the Asiatic plague 
that nearly depopulated London a couple of cen- 
turies ago.” 

‘‘But how does that concern us? There is no 
plague here, I reckon.” 

‘Sh! I’ve let it out! Well, never mind—just 
keep it to yourself. Perhaps I oughtn’t said any- 
thing, but it’s bound to come out sooner or later, so 
what is the odds? Old McDowells wouldn’t like 
me to—to—bother it all, I'll just tell the whole 
thing and let it go. You see, I’ve been down to 
St. Louis, and I happened to run across old Dr. 
McDowells—thinks the world of me, does the doctor. 
He’s a man that keeps himself to himself, and well 
he may, for he knows that he’s got a reputation that 
covers the whole earth—he won’t condescend to open 
himself out to many people, but, Lord bless you, 
he and I are just like brothers; he won’t let me 
go to a hotel when I’m in the city—says I’m the 
only man that’s company to him, and I don’t know 
but there’s some truth in it, too, because although 
I never like to glorify myself and make a great 
to-do over what I am or what I can do or what 
I know, I don’t mind saying here among friends that 
I am better read up in most sciences, maybe, than 
the general run of professional men in these days. 

108 


THE GILDED AGE 


Well, the other day he let me into a little secret, 
strictly on the quiet, about this matter of the plague. 

“You see it’s booming right along in our direc- 
tion—follows the Gulf Stream, you know, just as 
all those epidemics do—and within three months it 
will be just waltzing through this land like a whirl- 
wind! And whoever it touches can make his will 
and contract for the funeral. Well, you can’t cure 
it, you know, but you can prevent it. How? Tur- 
nips! that’s it! Turnips and water! Nothing like 
it in the world, old McDowells says, just fill your- 
self up two or three times a day, and you can snap 
your fingers at the plague. “Sh! keep mum, but just 
you confine yourself to that diet and you're all right. 
I wouldn’t have old McDowells know that I told 
about it for anything—he never would speak to me 
again. Take some more water, Washington—the 
more water you drink, the better. Here, let me give 
you some more of the turnips. No, no, no, now, I 
insist. There, now. Absorb those. They’re mighty 
sustaining—brimful of nutriment—all the medical 
books say so. Just eat from four to seven good- 
sized turnips at a meal, and drink from a pint and 
a half to a quart of water, and then just sit around 
a couple of hours and let them ferment. You'll 
feel like a fighting-cock next day.” 

Fifteen or twenty minutes later the Colonel’s 
tongue was still chattering away—he had piled up 
several future fortunes out of several incipient 
“operations”? which he had blundered into within 
the past week, and was now soaring along through 
some brilliant expectations born of late promising 

109 


MARK TWAIN 


experiments upon the lacking ingredient of the eye- 
water. And at such a time Washington ought to 
have been a rapt and enthusiastic listener, but he 
was not, for two matters disturbed his mind and 
distracted his attention. One was, that he dis- 
covered, to his confusion and shame, that in allowing 
himself to be helped a second time to the turnips, he 
had robbed those hungry children. He had not 
needed the dreadful “‘fruit,’’ and had not wanted it; 
and when he saw the pathetic sorrow in their faces 
when they asked for more and there was no more to 
give them, he hated himself for his stupidity and 
pitied the famishing young things with all his heart. 
The other matter that disturbed him was the dire 
inflation that had begun in his stomach. It grew 
and grew, it became more and more insupportable. 
Evidently the turnips were ‘‘fermenting.’”’” He forced 
himself to sit still as long as he could, but his anguish 
conquered him at last. 

He rose in the midst of the Colonel’s talk and 
excused himself on the plea of a previous engage- 
ment. The Colonel followed him to the door, 
promising over and over again that he would use his 
influence to get some of the Early Malcolms for 
him, and insisting that he should not be such a 
stranger but come and take pot-luck with him every 
chance he got. Washington was glad enough to get 
away and feel free again. He immediately bent his 
steps toward home. 

In bed he passed an hour that threatened to turn 
his hair gray, and then a blessed calm settled down 
upon him that filled his heart with gratitude. Weak 


IIo 


THE GILDED AGE 


and languid, he made shift to turn himself about 
and seek rest and sleep; and as his soul hovered upon 
the brink of unconsciousness, he heaved a long, 
deep sigh, and said to himself that in his heart he 
had cursed the Colonel’s preventive of rheumatism, 
before, and now let the plague come if it must—he 
was done with preventives; if ever any man be- 
guiled him with turnips and water again, let him 
eie the death. 

If he dreamed at all that night, no gossiping spirit 
disturbed his visions to whisper in his ear of certain 
matters just then in bud in the East, more than a 
thousand miles away, that after the lapse of a few 
years would develop influences which would pro- 
foundly affect the fate and fortunes of the Hawkins 
family. 


CHAPTER XII 


HARRY AND PHILIP GO WEST TO LAY OUT A RAILROAD 


Is=Qoew P42 


Todtenbuch, 141.17, 4. 


‘6 


H, it’s easy enough to make a fortune,”’ 
Henry said. 
““It seems to be easier than it is, I begin to think,”’ 
replied Philip. 

“Well, why don’t you go into something? You'll 
never dig it out of the Astor Library.’ 

If there be any place and time in the world where 
and when it seems easy to ‘‘go into something”’ it 
is in Broadway on a spring morning, when one is 
walking cityward, and has before him the long lines 
of palace-shops with an occasional spire seen through 
the soft haze that lies over the lower town, and 
hears the roar and hum of its multitudinous traffic. 

To the young American, here or elsewhere, the 
paths to fortune are innumerable and all open; 
there is invitation in the air and success in all his 
wide horizon. He is embarrassed which to choose, 
and is not unlikely to waste years in dallying with 
his chances, before giving himself to the serious tug 
and strain of a single object. He has no traditions 
I12 


THE GILDED AGE 


to bind him or guide him, and his impulse is to 
break away from the occupation his father has fol- 
lowed, and make a new way for himself. 

Philip Sterling used to say that if he should seri- 
ously set himself for ten years to any one of the 
dozen projects that were in his brain, he felt that 
he could be a rich man. He wanted to be rich, he 
had a sincere desire for a fortune, but for some un- 
accountable reason he hesitated about addressing 
himself to the narrow work of getting it. He never 
walked Broadway, a part of its tide of abundant 
shifting life, without feeling something of the flush 
of wealth, and unconsciously taking the elastic step 
of one well-to-do in this prosperous world. 

Especially at night in the crowded theater — 
Philip was too young to remember the old Cham- 
bers Street box, where the serious Burton led his 
hilarious and pagan crew—in the intervals of the 
screaming comedy, when the orchestra scraped and 
grunted and tooted its dissolute tunes, the world 
seemed full of opportunities to Philip, and his heart 
exulted with a conscious ability to take any of its 
prizes he chose to pluck. 

Perhaps it was the swimming ease of the acting on 
the stage, where virtue had its reward in three easy 
acts, perhaps it was the excessive light of the house, 
or the music, or the buzz of the excited talk between 
acts, perhaps it was youth which believed every- 
thing, but for some reason while Philip was at the 
theater he had the utmost confidence in life and his 
ready victory in it. 

Delightful illusion of paint and tinsel and silk 

113 


MARK TWAIN 


attire, of cheap sentiment and high and mighty 
dialogue! Will there not always be rosin enough 
for the squeaking fiddle-bow? Do we not all like 
the maudlin hero, who is sneaking round the right 
entrance, in wait to steal the pretty wife of his rich 
and tyrannical neighbor from the pasteboard cottage 
at the left entrance? and when he advances down 
to the footlights and defiantly informs the audience 
that, ‘“‘he who lays his hand on a woman except in 
the way of kindness,” do we not all applaud so as to 
drown the rest of the sentence? 

Philip never was fortunate enough to hear what 
would become of a man who should lay his hand 
on a woman with the exception named; but he 
learned afterward that the woman who lays her 
hand on a man, without any exception whatsoever, is 
always acquitted by the jury. 

‘The fact was, though Philip Sterling did not know 
it, that he wanted several other things quite as much 
as he wanted wealth. The modest fellow would 
have liked fame thrust upon him for some worthy 
achievement; it might be for a book, or for the 
skilful management of some great newspaper, or for 
some daring expedition like that of Lieutenant Strain 
or Dr. Kane. He was unable to decide exactly what 
it should be. Sometimes he thought he would like 
to stand in a conspicuous pulpit and humbly preach 
the gospel of repentance; and it even crossed his 
mind that it would be noble to give himself to a 
missionary life to some benighted region, where the 
date-palm grows, and the nightingale’s voice is in 
tune, and the bulbul sings on the off nights. If he 


114 


fie “GILDED AGE 


were good enough he would attach himself to that 
company of young men in the Theological Seminary, 
who were seeing New York life in preparation for 
the ministry. 

Philip was a New England boy and had graduated 
at Yale; he had not carried off with him all the 
learning of that venerable institution, but he knew 
some things that were not in the regular course of 
study. A very good use of the English language 
and considerable knowledge of its literature was one 
of them; he could sing a song very well, not in time 
to be sure, but with enthusiasm; he could make a 
magnetic speech at a moment’s notice in the class- 
room, the debating society, or upon any fence or 
dry-goods box that was convenient; he could lft 
himself by one arm, and do the giant swing in the 
gymnasium; he could strike out from his left shoul- 
der; he could handle an oar like a professional and 
pull stroke in a winning race. Philip had a good 
appetite, a sunny temper, and a clear hearty laugh. 
He had brown hair, hazel eyes set wide apart, a 
broad but not high forehead, and a fresh winning 
face. He was six feet high, with broad shoulders, 
long legs and a swinging gait; one of those loose- 
jointed, capable fellows, who saunter into the world 
with a free air and usually make a stir in whatever 
company they enter. 

After he left college Philip took the advice of 
friends and read law. Law seemed to him well 
enough as a science, but he never could discover a 
practical case where it appeared to him worth while 
to go to law, and all the clients who stopped with 

Ti 


MARK TWAIN 


this new clerk in the anteroom of the law- office 
where he was writing, Philip invariably advised to 
settle—no matter how, but settle—greatly to the 
disgust of his employer, who knew that justice be- 
tween man and man could only be attained by the 
recognized processes, with the attendant fees. Be- 
sides Philip hated the copying of pleadings, and he 
was certain that a life of “‘whereases”’ and ‘‘afore- 
saids’’ and whipping the devil round the stump, 
would be intolerable. 

His pen therefore, and whereas, and not as afore- 
said, strayed off into other scribbling. In an un- 
fortunate hour, he had two or three papers accepted 
by first-class magazines, at three dollars the printed 
page, and behold, his vocation was open to him. 
He would make his mark in literature. Life has 
no moment so sweet as that in which a young man 
believes himself called into the immortal ranks of 
the masters of literature. It is such a noble ambi- 
tion, that it is a pity it has usually such a shallow 
foundation. 

At the time of this history, Philip had gone to 
New York for a career. With his talent he thought 
he should have little difficulty in getting an editorial 
position upon a metropolitan newspaper; not that 
he knew anything about newspaper work, or had the 
least idea of journalism; he knew he was not fitted 
for the technicalities of the subordinate departments, 
but he could write leaders with perfect ease, he was 
sure. The drudgery of the newspaper-office was 
too distasteful, and besides it would be beneath the 
dignity of a graduate and a successful magazine 

116 


THE GILDED AGE 


writer. He wanted to begin at the top of the 
ladder. 

To his surprise he found that every situation in 
the editorial department of the journals was full, 
always had been full, was always likely to be full. 
It seemed to him that the newspaper managers 
didn’t want genius, but mere plodding and grubbing. 
Philip therefore read diligently in the Astor Library, 
planned literary works that should compel attention, 
and nursed his genius. He had no friend wise 
enough to tell him to step into the Dorking Con- 
vention, then in session, make a sketch of the men 
and women on the platform, and take it to the editor 
of the Daily Grapevine, and see what he could get 
a line for it. 

One day he had an offer from some country 
friends, who helieved in him, to take charge of a 
provincial daily newspaper, and he went to consult 
Mr. Gringo—Gringo who years ago managed the 
Atlas—about taking the situation. 

‘““Take it, of course,’”’ says Gringo, ‘‘take anything 
that offers, why not?” 

“But they want me to make it an opposition 
paper.”’ 

‘“Well, make it that. That party is going to 
succeed, it’s going to elect the next President.” 

“I don’t believe it,” said Philip, stoutly, ‘“‘it’s 
wrong in principle, and it ought not to succeed, and 
I don’t see how I can go for a thing I don’t be- 
lieve in.” 

“Oh, very well,” said Gringo, turning away with 
a shade of contempt, ‘‘you’ll find if you are going 

x7 


MARK TWAIN 


into literature and newspaper work that you can’t 
afford a conscience like that.’’ 

But Philip did afford it, and he wrote, thanking 
his friends, and declining because he said the politi- 
cal scheme would fail, and ought to fail. And he 
went back to his books and to his waiting for an 
opening large enough for his dignified entrance into 
the literary world. 

It was in this time of rather impatient waiting 
that Philip was one morning walking down Broad- 
way with Henry Brierly. He frequently accom- 
panied Henry part way down-town to what the latter 
called his office in Broad Street, to which he went, or 
pretended to go, with regularity every day. It was 
evident to the most casual acquaintance that he was 
a man of affairs, and that his time was engrossed in 
the largest sort of operations, about which there was 
a mysterious air. His liability to be suddenly sum- 
moned to Washington, or Boston, or Montreal, or 
even to Liverpool, was always imminent. He never 
was so summoned, but none of his acquaintances 
would have been surprised to hear any day that he 
had gone to Panama or Peoria, or to hear from him 
that he had bought the Bank of Commerce. 

The two were intimate at that time—they had 
been classmates—and saw a great deal of each 
other. Indeed, they lived together in Ninth Street, 
in a boarding-house there, which had the honor of 
lodging and partially feeding several other young 
fellows of like kidney, who have since gone their 
several ways into fame or into obscurity. 

It was during the morning walk to which reference 

118 


THE GILDED AGE 


has been made that Henry Brierly suddenly said, 
‘Philip, how would you like to go to St. Jo?” 

“I think I should like it of all things,’’ replied 
Philip, with some hesitation, ‘“but what for?” 

‘Oh, it’s a big operation. We are going, a lot 
of us, railroad men, engineers, contractors. You 
know my uncle is a great railroad man. I’ve no 
doubt I can get you a chance to go if you'll go.” 

“But in what capacity would I go?” 

“Well, I’m going as an engineer. You can go 
as one.”’ 

‘‘T don’t know an engine from a coal-cart.”’ 

‘“‘Field engineer, civil engineer. You can begin 
by carrying a rod, and putting down the figures. 
It’s easy enough. I’ll show you about that. We'll 
get Trautwine and some of those books.”’ 

‘Yes, but what is it for, what is it all about?” 

‘Why, don’t you see? We lay out a line, spot 
the good land, enter it up, know where the stations 
are to be, spot them, buy lots; there’s heaps of 
money in it. We wouldn’t engineer long.” 

‘When do you go?” was Philip’s next question, 
after some moments of silence. 

‘“To-morrow. Is that too soon?” 

‘“No, it’s not too soon. I’ve been ready to go 
anywhere for six months. The fact is, Henry, that 
I’m about tired of trying to force myself into things, 
and am quite willing to try floating with the stream 
for a while, and see where I will land. This seems 
like a providential call; it’s sudden enough.” 

The two young men, who were by this time full 
of the adventure, went down to the Wall Street 

II9Q 


MARK TWAIN 


office of Henry’s uncle and had a talk with that wily 
operator. The uncle knew Philip very well, and 
was pleased with his frank enthusiasm, and willing 
enough to give him a trial in the Western venture. 
It was settled therefore, in the prompt way in which 
things are settled in New York, that they would 
start with the rest of the company next morning for 
the West. 

On the way up-town these adventurers bought 
books on engineering, and suits of India-rubber, 
which they supposed they would need in a new and 
probably damp country, and many other things 
which nobody ever needed anywhere. 

The night was spent in packing up and writing 
letters, for Philip would not take such an important 
step without informing his friends. If they dis- 
approve, thought he, I’ve done my duty by letting 
them know. Happy youth, that is ready to pack 
its valise, and start for Cathay on an hour’s notice. 

‘“By the way,” calls out Philip from his bed- 
room, to Henry, ‘‘where is St. Jo?” 

‘‘Why, it’s in Missouri somewhere, on the frontier, 
I think. We'll get a map.” 

‘‘Never mind the map. We will find the place 
itself. I was afraid it was nearer home.” 

Philip wrote a long letter, first of all, to his mother, 
full of love and glowing anticipations of his new 
opening. He wouldn’t bother her with business de- 
tails, but he hoped that the day was not far off 
when she would see him return, with a moderate 
fortune, and something to add to the comfort of her 
advancing years. 

I20 


THE GILDED AGE 


To his uncle he said that he had made an arrange- 
ment with some New York capitalists to go to 
Missouri, in a land and railroad operation, which 
would at least give him a knowledge of the world 
and not unlikely offer him a business opening. He 
knew his uncle would be glad to hear that he had 
at last turned his thoughts to a practical matter. 

It was to Ruth Bolton that Philip wrote last. He 
might never see her again; he went to seek his 
fortune. He well knew the perils of the fontier, 
the savage state of society, the lurking Indians, and 
the dangers of fever. But there was no real danger 
to a person who took care of himself. Might he 
write to her often and tell her of his life. If he 
returned with a fortune, perhaps and perhaps. If he 
was unsuccessful, or if he never returned—perhaps 
it would be as well. No time or distance, however, 
would ever lessen his interest in her. He would say 
good night, but not good-by. 

In the soft beginning of a spring morning, long 
before New York had breakfasted, while yet the air 
of expectation hung about the wharves of the 
metropolis, our young adventurers made their way 
to the Jersey City Railway Station of the Erie 
Road, to begin the long, swinging, crooked journey, 
over what a writer of a former day called a causeway 
of cracked rails and cows, to the West. 


CHAPTER XIII 


COLONEL SELLERS WELCOMES THE YOUNG MEN TO 
ST. LOUIS 


What ever to say he toke in his entente, 
his langage was so fayer & pertynante, 
yt semeth vnto manys herying 
not only the worde, but veryly the thyng. 
Caxton’s Book of Curtesye, 1. 343-346 (ed., E. E. Text Society). 


N the party of which our travelers found them- 

selves members, was Duff Brown, the great rail- 
road contractor, and subsequently a well-known 
member of Congress; a bluff, jovial Bost’n man, 
thick-set, close-shaven, with a heavy jaw and a 
low forehead—a very pleasant man if you were not 
in his way. He had government contracts also, 
custom-houses, and dry-docks, from Portland to 
New Orleans, and managed to get out of Congress, 
in appropriations, about weight for weight of gold 
for the stone furnished. 

Associated with him, and also of this party, was 
Rodney Schaick, a sleek New York broker, a man 
as prominent in the church as in the Stock Ex- 
change, dainty in his dress, smooth of speech, the 
necessary complement of Duff Brown in any enter- 
prise that needed assurance and adroitness. 

It would be difficult to find a pleasanter traveling 


I22 


tit GiLDED AGE 


party, one that shook off more readily the artificial 
restraints of Puritanic strictness, and took the world 
with good-natured allowance. Money was plenty 
for every attainable luxury, and there seemed to be 
no doubt that its supply would continue, and that 
fortunes were about to be made without a great 
deal of toil. Even Philip soon caught the prevailing 
spirit; Harry did not need any inoculation, he 
always talked in six figures. It was as natural for the 
dear boy to be rich as it is for most people to be 
poor. 

The elders of the party were not long in discover- 
ing the fact, which almost all travelers to the West 
soon find out, that the water was poor. It must 
have been by a lucky premonition of this that they 
all had brandy flasks with which to qualify the 
water of the country; and it was no doubt from an 
uneasy feeling of the danger of being poisoned that 
they kept experimenting, mixing a little of the dan- 
gerous and changing fluid, as they passed along, with 
the contents of the flasks, thus saving their lives 
hour by hour. Philip learned afterward that tem- 
perance and the strict observance of Sunday and a 
certain gravity of deportment are geographical 
habits, which people do not usually carry with them 
away from home. 

Our travelers stopped in Chicago long enough to 
see that they could make their fortunes there in 
two weeks’ time, but it did not seem worth while; 
the West was more attractive; the further one went 
the wider the opportunities opened. They took rail- 
road to Alton and the steamboat from there to St. 

123 


MARK TWAIN 


Louis, for the change and to have a glimpse of the 
river. 

“‘Isn’t this jolly?’ cried Henry, dancing out of 
the barber’s room, and coming down the deck with 
a one, two, three step, shaven, curled, and perfumed 
after his usual exquisite fashion. 

““What’s jolly?’ asked Philip, looking out upon 
the dreary and monotonous waste through which 
the shaking steamboat was coughing its way. 

‘“Why, the whole thing; it’s immense, I can tell 
you. J wouldn’t give that to be guaranteed a hun- 
dred thousand cold cash in a year’s time.” 

*“Where’s Mr. Brown?” 

‘‘He is in the saloon, playing poker with Schaick, 
and that long-haired party with the striped trousers, 
who scrambled aboard when the stage-plank was half 
hauled in, and the big delegate to Congress from 
out West.” 

‘‘That’s a fine-looking fellow, that delegate, with 
his glossy black whiskers; looks like a Washington 
man; I shouldn’t think he’d be at poker.”’ 

‘Oh, it’s only five-cent ante, just to make it 
interesting, the delegate said.” 

‘But I shouldn’t think a representative in Con- 
gress would play poker any way in a public steam- 
boat.” 

‘‘Nonsense, you’ve got to pass the time. I tried 
a hand myself, but those old fellows are too many 
forme. The delegate knows all the points. I’d bet 
a hundred dollars he will ante his way right into 
the United States Senate when his territory comes 
in. He’s got the cheek for it.”’ 

124 


THE GILDED AGE 


““He has the grave and thoughtful manner of 
expectoration of a public man, for one thing,” 
added Philip. 

“Harry,” said Philip, after a pause, ‘‘what have 
you got on those big boots for; do you expect to 
wade ashore?” 

“I’m breaking ’em in.”’ 

The fact was Harry had got himself up in what 
he thought a proper costume for a new country, and 
was in appearance a sort of compromise between a 
dandy of Broadway and a backwoodsman. MHarry, 
with blue eyes, fresh complexion, silken whiskers, 
and curly chestnut hair, was as handsome as a 
fashion-plate. He wore this morning a soft hat, a 
short cutaway coat, an open vest displaying im- 
maculate linen, a leathern belt round his waist, and 
top-boots of soft leather, well polished, that came 
above his knees and required a string attached to 
his belt to keep them up. The light-hearted fellow 
gloried in these shining incasements of his well- 
shaped legs, and told Philip that they were a perfect 
protection against prairie-rattlesnakes, which never 
strike above the knee. 

The landscape still wore an almost wintry appear- 
ance when our travelers left Chicago. It was a 
genial spring day when they landed at St. Louis; the 
birds were singing, the blossoms of peach trees in 
city garden plots made the air sweet, and in the 
roar and tumult on the long river levee they found 
an excitement that accorded with their own hopeful 
anticipations. 

The party went to the Southern Hotel, where the 

125 


MARK TWAIN 


great Duff Brown was very well known, and indeed 
was a man of so much importance that even the 
office clerk was respectful to him. He might have 
respected in him also a certain vulgar swagger and 
insolence of money, which the clerk greatly admired. 

The young fellows liked the house and liked the 
city; it seemed to them a mighty free and hospitable 
town. Coming from the East they were struck with 
many peculiarities. Everybody smoked in the 
streets, for one thing, they noticed; everybody 
‘took a drink’? in an open manner whenever he 
wished to do so or was asked, as if the habit needed 
no concealment or apology. In the evening when 
they walked about they found people sitting on the 
doorsteps of their dwellings, in a manner not usual 
in a Northern city; in front of some of the hotels 
and saloons the sidewalks were filled with chairs and 
benches—Paris fashion, said Harry—upon which 
people lounged in these warm spring evenings, 
smoking, always smoking; and the clink of glasses 
and of billiard- balls was in the air. It was de- 
lightful. 

Harry at once found on landing that his back- 
woods costume would not be needed in St. Louis, 
and that, in fact, he had need of all the resources of 
his wardrobe to keep even with the young swells of 
the town. But this did not much matter, for Harry 
was always superior to his clothes. As they were 
likely to be detained some time in the city, Harry 
told Philip that he was going to improve his time. 
And he did. It was an encouragement to any in- 
dustrious man to see this young fellow rise, carefully 

126 


THE GILDED AGE 


dress himself, eat his breakfast deliberately, smoke 
his cigar tranquilly, and then repair to his room, to 
what he called his work, with a grave and occupied 
manner, but with perfect cheerfulness. 

Harry would take off his coat, remove his cravat, 
roll up his shirt-sleeves, give his curly hair the right 
touch before the glass, get out his book on engineer- 
ing, his boxes of instruments, his drawing-paper, 
his profile paper, open the book of logarithms, mix 
his India-ink, sharpen his pencils, light a cigar, and 
sit down at the table to ‘‘lay out a line,”’ with the 
most grave notion that he was mastering the details 
of engineering. He would spend half a day in these 
preparations without ever working out a problem or 
having the faintest conception of the use of lines or 
logarithms. And when he had finished, he had the 
most cheerful confidence that he had done a good 
day’s work. 

It made no difference, however, whether Harry 
was in his room in a hotel or in a tent, Philip soon 
found, he was just the same. In camp he would 
get himself up in the most elaborate toilet at his 
command, polish his long boots to the top, lay out 
his work before him, and spend an hour or longer, 
if anybody was looking at him, humming airs, knit- 
ting his brows, and ‘‘working”’ at engineering; and 
if a crowd of gaping rustics were looking on all the 
while it was perfectly satisfactory to him. ’ 

‘You see,’ he says to Philip one morning at the 
hotel when he was thus engaged, ‘‘I want to get the 
theory of this thing, so that I can have a check on 
the engineers.” 

127 


MARK TWAIN 


““T thought you were going to be an engineer your- 
self,’’ queried Philip. 

‘‘Not many times, if the court knows herself. 
There’s better game. Brown and Schaick have, or 
will have, the control for the whole line of the Salt 
Lick Pacific Extension, forty thousand dollars a mile 
over the prairie, with extra for hardpan—and it ’ll 
be pretty much all hardpan, I can tell you; besides 
every alternate section of land on this line. There’s 
millions in the job. I’m to have the sub-contract for 
the first fifty miles, and you can bet it’s a soft 
thing. 

“Til tell you what you do, Philip,’ continued 
Harry, in a burst of generosity, ‘‘if I don’t get you 
into my contract, you'll be with the engineers, and 
you just stick a stake at the first ground marked for 
a depot, buy the land of the farmer before he knows 
where the depot will be, and we'll turn a hundred or 
so on that. J’ll advance the money for the pay- 
ments, and you can sell the lots. Schaick is going 
to let me have ten thousand just for a flyer in such 
operations.” 

“But that’s a good deal of money.” 

‘Wait till you are used to handling money. I 
didn’t come out here for a bagatelle. My uncle 
wanted me to stay East and go in on the Mobile 
custom-house, work up the Washington end of it; 
he said there was a fortune in it for a smart young 
fellow, but I preferred to take the chances out here. 
Did I tell you I had an offer from Bobbett and 
Fanshaw to go into their office as confidential clerk 
on a salary of ten thousand?” 

128 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Why didn’t you take it?’ asked Philip, to whom 
a salary of two thousand would have seemed wealth, 
before he started on this journey. 

“Take it? I’d rather operate on my own hook,” 
said Harry in his most airy manner. 

A few evenings after their arrival at the Southern 
Philip and Harry made the acquaintance of a very 
agreeable gentleman, whom they had frequently 
seen before about the hotel corridors, and passed a 
casual word with. He had the air of a man of 
business, and was evidently a person of importance. 

The precipitating of this casual intercourse into 
the more substantial form of an acquaintanceship 
was the work of the gentleman himself, and oc- 
curred in this wise. Meeting the two friends in the 
lobby one evening, he asked them to give him the 
time, and added: 

““Excuse me, gentlemen—strangers in St. Louis? 
Ah, yes—yes. From the East, perhaps? Ah, just 
so, just so. Eastern born myself—Virginia. Sellers 
is my name—Beriah Sellers. Ah—by the way— 
New York, did you say? That reminds me; just 
met some gentlemen from your state a week or 
two ago—very prominent gentlemen—-in public 
life they are; you must know them, without doubt. 
Let me see—let me see. Curious those names 
have escaped me. I know they were from your 
state, because I remember afterward my old friend, 
Governor Shackleby, said to me—fine man, is the 
Governor—one of the finest men our country has 
produced—said he, ‘Colonel, how did you like 
those New York gentlemen? not many such men in 

129 


MARK TWAIN 


the world, Colonel’ Sellers,’ said the Governor— 
yes, it was New York he said—I remember it dis- 
tinctly. I can’t recall those names, somehow. But 
no matter. Stopping here, gentlemen—stopping 
at the Southern?” 

In shaping their reply in their minds, the title 
‘“Mr.”’ had a place in it; but when their turn had 
arrived to speak, the title ‘“‘Colonel’”’ came from 
their lips instead. 

They said yes, they were abiding at the Southern, 
and thought it a very good house. 

‘Yes, yes, the Southern is fair. I myself go to 
the Planter’s, old, aristocratic house. We Southern 
gentlemen don’t change our ways, you know. I 
always make it my home there when I run down 
from Hawkeye—my plantation is in Hawkeye, a 
little up in the country. You should know the 
Planter’s.”’ 

Philip and Harry both said they should like to see 
a hotel that had been so famous in its day—a 
cheerful hostelry, Philip said it must have been 
when duels were fought there across the dining- 
room table. 

‘“You may believe it, sir, an uncommonly pleasant 
lodging. Shall we walk?” 

And the three strolled along the streets, the 
Colonel talking all the way in the most liberal and 
friendly manner, and with a frank open-heartedness 
that inspired confidence. 

‘Yes, born East myself, raised all along, know 
the West—a great country, gentlemen. The place 
for a young fellow of spirit to pick up a fortune, 

130 


THE GILDED AGE 


simply pick it up; it’s lying round loose here. Not 
a day that I don’t put aside an opportunity, too 
busy to look into it. Management of my own prop- 
erty takes my time. First visit? Looking for an 
opening ?”’ 

‘“Yes, looking around,’’ replied Harry. 

‘‘Ah, here we are. You’d rather sit here in 
front than go to my apartments? So had I. An 
opening, eh?” 

The Colonel’s eyes twinkled. ‘‘Ah, just so. The 
whole country is opening up, all we want is capital 
to develop it. Slap down the rails and bring the 
land into market. The richest land on God Al- 
mighty’s footstool is lying right out there. If I had 
my capital free I could plant it for millions.” 

“‘I suppose your capital is largely in your planta- 
tion?’’ asked Philip. 

‘Well, partly, sir, partly. I’m down here now 
with reference to a little operation—a little side 
thing merely. By the way, gentlemen, excuse the 
liberty, but it’s about my usual time—’”’ 

The Colonel paused, but as no movement of his 
acquaintances followed this plain remark, he added, 
in an explanatory manner: 

“I’m rather particular about the exact time— 
have to be in this climate.” 

Even this open declaration of his hospitable in- 
tention not being understood the Colonel politely said: 

“Gentlemen, will you take something?” 

Colonel Sellers led the way to a saloon on Fourth 
Street under the hotel, and the young gentlemen fell 
into the custom of the country. 

moa 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“Not that,’”’ said the Colonel to the barkeeper, 
who shoved along the counter a bottle of apparently 
corn-whisky, as if he had done it before on the same 
order; ‘‘not that,’’ with a wave of the hand. ‘‘ That 
Otard, if you please. Yes. Never take an inferior 
liquor, gentlemen, not in the evening, in this climate. 
There. That’s the stuff. My respects!’ 

The hospitable gentleman, having disposed of his 
liquor, remarking that it was not quite the thing— 
‘“‘when a man has his own cellar to go to, he is apt 
to get a little fastidious about his liquors’’—called 
for cigars. But the brand offered did not suit him; 
he motioned the box away, and asked for some 
particular Havanas, those in separate wrappers. 

‘“‘T always smoke this sort, gentlemen; they area 
little more expensive, but you'll learn, in this cli- 
mate, that you’d better not economize on poor 
cars.” 

Having imparted this valuable piece of informa- 
tion, the Colonel lighted the fragrant cigar with 
satisfaction, and then carelessly put his fingers into 
his right vest pocket. That movement being with- 
out result, with a shade of disappointment on his 
face, he felt in his left vest pocket. Not finding 
anything there, he looked up with a serious and 
annoved air, anxiously slapped his mght pantaloons 
pocket, and then his left, and exclaimed: 

‘‘By George, that’s annoying. By George, that’s 
mortifying. Never had anything of that kind hap- 
pen to me before. I’ve left my pocket-book. 
Hold! MHere’s a bill, after all. No, thunder, it’s 
@ receipt.” 

132 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Allow me,” said Philip, seeing how seriously 
the Colonel was annoyed, and taking out his purse. 

The Colonel protested he couldn’t think of it, and 
muttered something to the barkeeper about “‘hang- 
ing it up,”’ but the vender of exhilaration made no 
sign, and Philip had the privilege of paying the 
costly shot; Colonel Sellers profusely apologizing 
and claiming the right ‘‘next time, next time.”’ 

As soon as Beriah Sellers had bade his friends 
good night and seen them depart, he did not retire 
to apartments in the Planter’s, but took his way 
to his lodgings with a friend in a distant part of 
the city. 


CHAPTER XIV 
AT PHILADELPHIA. RUTH BOLTON INTRODUCED 


Pulchra duos inter sita stat Philadelphia rivos; 
Inter quos duo sunt millia longa vie. 
Delawar his major, Sculkil minor ille vocatur; 
Indis et Suevis notus uterque diu. 
Hic plateas mensor spatiis delineat equis, 
Et domui recto est ordine juncta domus. 
T. Makin. 
Vergin era fra lor di gid matura 
Verginita, d’alti pensieri e regi, 
D’alta belta; ma sua belta non cura, 


O tanta sol, quant’ onesta sen fregi. 
Tasso. 


HE letter that Philip Sterling wrote to Ruth 
Bolton, on the evening of setting out to seek 

his fortune in the West, found that young lady in 
her own father’s house in Philadelphia. It was one 
of the pleasantest of the many charming suburban 
houses in that hospitable city, which is territorially 
one of the largest cities in the world, and only pre- 
vented from becoming the convenient metropolis of 
the country by the intrusive strip of Camden and 
Amboy sand which shuts it off from the Atlantic 
Ocean. It is a city of steady thrift, the arms of 
which might well be the deliberate but delicious 
terrapin that imparts such a royal flavor to its feasts. 
It was a spring morning, and perhaps it was the 

134 


THE GILDED AGE 


influence of it that made Ruth a little restless, satis- 
fied neither with the outdoors nor the indoors. Her 
sisters had gone to the city to show some country 
visitors Independence Hall, Girard College, and 
Fairmount Waterworks and Park, four objects which 
Americans cannot die peacefully, even in Naples, 
without having seen. But Ruth confessed that she 
was tired of them, and also of the Mint. She was 
tired of other things. She tried this morning an 
air or two upon the piano, sang a simple song in a 
sweet, but slightly metallic voice, and then seating 
herself by the open window, read Philip’s letter. 

Was she thinking about Philip, as she gazed 
across the fresh lawn over the tree-tops to the Chel- 
ton Hills, or of that world which his entrance into 
her tradition-bound life had been one of the means 
of opening to her? Whatever she thought, she was 
not idly musing, as one might see by the expression of 
her face. After a time she took up a book; it was 
a medical work, and to all appearance about as 
interesting to a girl of eighteen as the statutes at 
large; but her face was soon aglow over its pages, 
and she was so absorbed in it that she did not notice 
the entrance of her mother at the open door. 

> Reath?”’ 

“Well, mother,’’ said the young student, looking 
up, with a shade of impatience. 

“‘I wanted to talk with thee a little about thy 
plans.” 

““Mother, thee knows I couldn’t stand it at 
Westfield; the school stifled me, it’s a place to turn 
young people into dried fruit.”’ 

135 


MARK TWAIN 


‘I know,”’ said Margaret Bolton, with a half- 
anxious smile, “thee chafes against all the ways 
of Friends, but what will thee do? Why is thee so 
discontented ?”’ 

“If I must say it, mother, I want to go away, 
and get out of this dead level.” 

With a look half of pain and half of pity, her 
mother answered, ‘‘I am sure thee is little interfered 
with; thee dresses as thee will, and goes where thee 
pleases, to any church thee likes, and thee has music. 
I had a visit yesterday from the society’s committee 
by way of discipline, because we have a piano in the 
house, which is against the rules.” 

“‘T hope thee told the elders that father and I 
are responsible for the piano, and that, much as 
thee loves music, thee is never in the room when it 
is played. Fortunately father is already out of 
meeting, so they can’t discipline him. I[ heard 
father tell Cousin Abner that he was whipped so 
often for whistling when he was a boy that he was 
determined to have what compensation he could get 
now.” 

“Thy ways greatly try me, Ruth, and all thy 
relations. I desire thy happiness first of all, but 
thee is starting out on a dangerous path. Is thy 
father willing thee should go away to a school of the 
world’s people?”’ 

“I have not asked him,” Ruth replied with a 
look that might imply that she was one of those 
determined little bodies who first made up her own 
mind and then compelled others to make up theirs 
in accordance with hers. 

136 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘And when thee has got the education thee 
wants, and lost all relish for the society of thy 
friends and the ways of thy ancestors, what then?”’ 

Ruth turned square round to her mother, and 
with an impassive face and not the slightest change 
of tone, said: 

‘“Mother, I’m going to study medicine!” 

Margaret Bolton almost lost for a moment her 
habitual placidity. 

‘“Thee, study medicine! A slight frail girl like 
thee, study medicine? Does thee think thee could 
stand it six months? And the lectures, and the 
dissecting-rooms, has thee thought of the dissecting- 
rooms?” 

‘“Mother,” said Ruth calmly, ‘‘I have thought 
it all over. JI know I can go through the whole, 
clinics, dissecting-room and all. Does thee think I 
lack nerve? What is there to fear in a person dead 
more than in a person living?”’ 

“But thy health and strength, child; thee can 
never stand the severe application, And, besides, 
suppose thee does learn medicine?”’ 

‘“‘T will practise it.”’ 

“Were?” 

“‘Here.”’ 

‘“Where thee and thy family are known?” 

‘Tf I can get patients.”’ 

‘‘T hope at least, Ruth, thee will let us know 
when thee opens an office,’’ said her mother, with 
an approach to sarcasm that she rarely indulged in, 
as she rose and left the room. 

Ruth sat quite still for a time, with face intent 

137 


MARK TWAIN 


and flushed. It was out now. She had begun her 
open battle. 

The sight-seers returned in high spirits from the 
city. Was there any building in Greece to compare 
with Girard College, was there ever such a magnifi- 
cent pile of stone devised for the shelter of poor 
orphans? Think of the stone shingles of the roof 
eight inches thick! Ruth asked the enthusiasts if 
they would like to live in such a sounding mauso- 
leum, with its great halls and echoing rooms, and no 
comfortable place in it for the accommodation of 
anybody? If they were orphans, would they like 
to be brought up in a Grecian temple? 

And then there was Broad Street! Wasn’t it the 
broadest and the longest street in the world? There 
certainly was no end to it, and even Ruth was 
Philadelphian enough to believe that a street ought 
not to have any end, or architectural point upon 
which the weary eye could rest. 

But neither St. Girard, nor Broad Street, neither 
the wonders of the Mint nor the glories of the 
Hall where the ghosts of our fathers sit always sign- 
ing the Declaration, impressed the visitors so much 
as the splendors of the Chestnut Street windows, and 
the bargains on Eighth Street. The truth is that 
the country cousins had come to town to attend the 
Yearly Meeting, and the amount of shopping that 
preceded that religious event was scarcely exceeded 
by the preparations for the opera in more worldly 
circles. 

“Ts thee going to the Yearly Meeting, Ruth?” 
asked one of the girls. 

138 


ie  GLLDED AGE 


‘“‘T have nothing to wear,” replied that demure 
person. ‘‘If thee wants to see new bonnets, ortho- 
dox to a shade and conformed to the letter of the 
true form, thee must go to the Arch Street Meeting. 
Any departure from either color or shape would be 
instantly taken note of. It has occupied mother a 
long time, to find at the shops the exact shade for her 
new bonnet. Oh, thee must go, by all means. But 
thee won’t see there a sweeter woman than mother.”’ 

‘‘And thee won’t go?” 

‘“Why should I? I’ve been again and again. If 
I go to Meeting at all I like best to sit in the quiet 
old house in Germantown, where the windows are 
all open and I can see the trees, and hear the stir 
of the leaves. It’s such a crush at the Yearly Meet- 
ing at Arch Street, and then there’s the row of sleek- 
looking young men who line the curbstone and stare 
at us as we come out. No, I don’t feel at home 
there,”’ 

That evening Ruth and her father sat late by 
the drawing-room fire, as they were quite apt 
to do at night. It was always a time of confi- 
dences. 

‘“Thee has another letter from young Sterling,” 
said Eli Bolton. 

“Yes. Philip has gone to the Far West.”’ 

‘“How far?’’ 

‘‘He doesn’t say, but it’s on the frontier, and 
on the map everything beyond it is marked ‘In- 
dians’ and ‘desert,’ and looks as desolate as a 
Wednesday Meeting.” 

‘““Humph. It was time for him to do something. 

139 


MARK TWAIN 


Is he going to start a daily newspaper among the 
Kick-a-poos?”’ 

‘‘Father, thee’s unjust to Philip.. He’s going into 
business.” 

‘‘What sort of business can a young man go into 
without capital?” 

‘‘He doesn’t say exactly what it is,” said Ruth, a 
little dubiously, ‘‘but it’s something about land and 
railroads, and thee knows, father, that fortunes are 
made nobody knows exactly how, in a new country.” 

*‘T should think so, you innocent puss, and in an 
old one too. But Philip is honest, and he has talent 
enough, if he will stop scribbling, to make his way. 
But thee may as well take care of theeself, Ruth, 
and not go dawdling along with a young man in his 
adventures, until thy own mind is a little more 
settled what thee wants.” 

This excellent advice did not seem to impress 
Ruth greatly, for she was looking away with that 
abstraction of vision which often came into her gray 
eyes, and at length she exclaimed, with a sort of 
impatience: 

“T wish I could go West, or South, or some- 
where. What a box women are put into, measured 
for it, and put in young; if we go anywhere it’s in a 
box, veiled and pinioned and shut in by disabilities. 
Father, I should like to break things and get loose.” 

What a sweet-voiced little innocent it was, to be 
sure. 

‘‘Thee will no doubt break things enough when 
thy time comes, child; women always have; but 
what does thee want now that thee hasn’t?” 

140 


THE GILDED AGE 


“TI want to be something, to make myself some- 
thing, to do something. Why should I rust, and be 
stupid, and sit in inaction because I am a girl? 
What would happen to me if thee should lose thy 
property and die? What one useful thing could I 
do for a living, for the support of mother and the 
children? And if I had a fortune, would thee want 
me to lead a useless life?” 

‘Has thy mother led a useless life?”’ 

‘“Somewhat that depends upon whether her chil- 
dren amount to anything,’ retorted the sharp little 
disputant. ‘‘What’s the good, father, of a series 
of human beings who don’t advance any?”’ 

Friend Eli, who had long ago laid aside the 
Quaker dress, and was out of Meeting, and who, in 
fact, after a youth of doubt could not yet define his 
belief, nevertheless looked with some wonder at this 
fierce young eagle of his, hatched in a Friend’s 
dovecote. But he only said: 

*“Has thee consulted thy mother about a career, 
I suppose it is a career thee wants?” 

Ruth did not reply directly; she complained that 
her mother didn’t understand her. But that wise 
and placid woman understood the sweet rebel a 
great deal better than Ruth understood herself. 
She also had a history, possibly, and had sometime 
beaten her young wings against the cage of custom, 
and indulged in dreams of a new social order, and 
had passed through that fiery period when it seems 
possible for one mind, which has not yet tried its 
limits, to break up and rearrange the world. 

Ruth replied to Philip’s letter in due time and in 

141 


MARK TWAIN 


the most cordial and unsentimental manner. - Philip 
liked the letter, as he did everything she did; but 
he had a dim notion that there was more about her- 
self in the letter than about him. He took it with 
him from the Southern Hotel, when he went to 
walk, and read it over and again in an unfrequented 
street as he stumbled along. The rather common- 
place and unformed handwriting seemed to him 
peculiar and characteristic, different from that of 
any other woman. 

Ruth was glad to hear that Philip had made a 
push into the world, and she was sure that his talent 
and courage would make a way for him. She should 
pray for his success, at any rate, and especially that 
the Indians, in St. Louis, would not take his scalp. 

' Philip looked rather dubious at this sentence, and 
wished that he had written nothing about Indians. 


CHAPTER XV 
RUTH STUDIES MEDICINE. A DISSECTING-ROOM 


—Rationalem quidem puto medicinam esse debere: instrui 
vero ab evidentibus causis; obscuris omnibus non a cogitatione 
artificis, sed ab ipsa arte rejectis. Incidere autem vivorum 
corpora, et crudele, et supervacuum est: mortuorum corpora dis- 


centibus necessarium. 
Celsus. 


LI BOLTON and his wife talked over Ruth’s 

case, as they had often done before, with no 
little anxiety. Alone of all their children she was 
impatient of the restraints and monotony of the 
Friends’ Society, and wholly indisposed to accept 
the ‘‘inner light”’ as a guide into a life of acceptance 
and inaction. When Margaret told her husband 
of Ruth’s newest project, he did not exhibit so 
much surprise as she looked for. In fact, .he said 
that he did not see why a woman should not enter 
the medical profession if she felt a call to it. 

“But,” said Margaret, ‘‘consider her total inex- 
perience of the world, and her frail health. Can 
such a slight little body endure the ordeal of the 
preparation for, or the strain of, the practice of the 
profession?” 

‘Did thee ever think, Margaret, whether she can 
endure being thwarted in an object on which she has 
so set her heart, as she has on this? Thee has 

143 


MARK TWAIN 


trained her thyself at home, in her enfeebled child- 
hood, and thee knows how strong her will is, and 
what she has been able to accomplish in self-culture 
by the simple force of her determination. She 
never will be satisfied until she has tried her own 
strength.”’ 

‘‘T wish,” said Margaret, with an inconsequence 
that is not exclusively feminine, ‘‘that she were in 
the way to fall in love and marry by and by. I 
think that would cure her of some of her notions. 
I am not sure, but if she went away to some distant 
school, into an entirely new life, her thoughts would 
be diverted.” 

Eli Bolton almost laughed as he regarded his 
wife, with eyes that never looked at her except 
fondly, and replied: 

‘*Perhaps thee remembers that thee had notions 
also, before we were married, and before thee be- 
came a member of Meeting. I think Ruth comes 
honestly by certain tendencies which thee has hidden 
under the Friend’s dress.”’ 

Margaret could not say ‘‘no”’ to this, and while 
she paused, it was evident that memory was busy 
with suggestions to shake her present opinions. 

‘‘Why not let Ruth try the study for a time?” 
suggested Eli; ‘‘there is a fair beginning of a Wom- 
an’s Medical College in the city. Quite likely she 
will soon find that she needs first a more general 
culture, and fall in with thy wish that she should 
see more of the world at some large school.” 

There really seemed to be nothing else to be done, 
and Margaret consented at length without approv- 

144 


THE GILDED AGE 


ing. And it was agreed that Ruth, in order to spare 
her fatigue, should take lodgings with friends near 
the college and make a trial in the pursuit of that 
science to which we all owe our lives, and sometimes 
as by a miracle of escape. 

That day Mr. Bolton brought home a stranger 
to dinner, Mr. Bigler of the great firm of Penny- 
backer, Bigler & Small, railroad contractors. He was 
always bringing home somebody, who had a scheme 
to build a road, or open a mine, or plant a swamp 
with cane to grow paper-stock, or found a hospital, 
or invest in a patent shad-bone separator, or start a 
college somewhere on the frontier, contiguous to a 
land speculation. 

The Bolton house was a sort of hotel for this 
kind of people. They were always coming. Ruth 
had always known them from childhood, and she 
used to say that her father attracted them as natu- 
rally as a sugar hogshead does flies. Ruth had an 
idea that a large portion of the world lived by 
getting the rest of the world into schemes. Mr. 
Bolton never could say “‘no”’ to any of them, not 
even, said Ruth again, to the society for stamping 
oyster-shells with scripture texts before they were 
sold at retail. 

Mr. Bigler’s plan this time, about which he talked 
loudly, with his mouth full, all dinner-time, was the 
building of the Tunkhannock, Rattlesnake, and 
Youngwomans-town Railroad, which would not only 
be a great highway to the West, but would open to 
market inexhaustible coal-fields and untold millions 
of lumber. The plan of operations was very simple. 

145 


MARK TWAIN 


“We'll buy the lands,” explained he, ‘‘on long 
time, backed by the notes of good men; and then 
mortgage them for money enough to get the road 
well on. Then get the towns on the line to issue 
their bonds for stock, and sell their bonds for enough 
to complete the road, and partly stock it, especially 
if we mortgage each section as we complete it. We 
can. then sell the rest of the stock on the prospect 
of the business of the road through an improved 
country, and also sell the lands at a big advance, 
on the strength of the road. All we want,” con- 
tinued Mr. Bigler in his frank manner, ‘‘is a few 
thousand dollars to start the surveys, and arrange 
things in the legislature. There is some parties will 
have to be seen who might make us trouble.” 

“It will take a good deal of money to start the 
enterprise,’ remarked Mr. Bolton, who knew very 
well what ‘‘seeing’’ a Pennsylvania legislature 
meant, but was too polite to tell Mr. Bigler what he 
thought of him, while he was his guest; ‘‘what 
security would one have for it?” 

Mr. Bigler smiled a hard kind of smile, and said, 
‘You'd be inside, Mr. Bolton, and you’d have the 
first chance in the deal.”’ 

This was rather unintelligible to Ruth, who was 
nevertheless somewhat amused by the study of a 
type of character she had seen before. At length 
she interrupted the conversation by asking: 

‘*You’d sell the stock, I suppose, Mr. Bigler, to 
anybody who was attracted by the prospectus?” 

‘‘Oh, certainly, serve all alike,’’ said Mr. Bigler, 
now noticing Ruth for the first time, and a little 

146 


THE GILDED AGE 


puzzled by the serene, intelligent face that was 
turned toward him. 

“Well, what would become of the poor people 
who had been led to put their little money into the 
speculation, when you got out of it and left it half- 
way?” 

It would be no more true to say of Mr. Bigler 
that he was or could be embarrassed, than to say 
that a brass counterfeit dollar-piece would change 
color when refused; the question annoyed him a 
little, in Mr. Bolton’s presence. 

““Why, yes, Miss, of course, in a great enterprise 
for the benefit of the community there will little 
things occur, which, which—and, of course, the poor 
ought to be looked to; I tell my wife that the poor 
must be looked to; if you can tell who are poor— 
there’s so many impostors. And, then, there’s so 
many poor in the legislature to be looked after,” 
said the contractor with a sort of chuckle, ‘‘isn’t that 
so, Mr. Bolton?”’ 

Eli Bolton replied that he never had much to do 
with the legislature. 

““Yes,”’ continued this public benefactor, ‘‘an 
uncommon poor lot this year, uncommon. Conse- 
quently an expensive lot. The fact is, Mr. Bolton, 
that the price is raised so high on United States 
Senator now, that it affects the whole market: you 
can’t get any public improvement through on reason- 
able terms. Simony is what I call it, Simony,” 
repeated Mr. Bigler, as if he had said a good thing. 

Mr. Bigler went on and gave some very inter- 
esting details of the intimate connection between 

147 


MARK TWAIN 


railroads and politics, and thoroughly entertained 
himself all dinner-time, and as much disgusted 
Ruth, who asked no more questions, and her father 
who replied in monosyllables. 

‘“‘T wish,” said Ruth to her father, after the guest 
had gone, ‘“‘that you wouldn’t bring home any 
more such horrid men. Do all men who wear big 
diamond breastpins flourish their knives at table, 
and use bad grammar, and cheat?” 

‘‘Oh, child, thee mustn’t be too observing. Mr. 
Bigler is one of the most important men in the 
state; nobody has more influence at Harrisburg. I 
don’t like him any more than thee does, but I’d 
better lend him a little money than to have his ill 
will.”’ 

‘‘Father, I think thee’d better have his ill will 
than his company. Is it true that he gave money 
to help build the pretty little church of St. James 
the Less, and that he is one of the vestrymen?”’ 

‘“Yes. He is not such a bad fellow. One of 
the men in Third Street asked him the other day, 
whether his was a high church or a low church? 
Bigler said he didn’t know; he’d been in it once, 
and he could touch the ceiling in the side aisle with 
his hand.”’ 

‘“‘T think he’s just horrid,’’ was Ruth’s final sum- 
mary of him, after the manner of the swift judgment 
of women, with no consideration of the extenuating 
circumstances. Mr. Bigler had no idea that he had 
not made a good impression on the whole family; 
he certainly intended to be agreeable. Margaret 
agreed with her daughter, and though she never said 

148 


THE GILDED AGE 


anything to such people, she was grateful to Ruth 
for sticking at least one pin into him. 

Such was the serenity of the Bolton household 
that a stranger in it would never have suspected 
there was any opposition to Ruth’s going to the 
medical school. And she went quietly to take her 
residence in town, and began her attendance of the 
lectures, as if it were the most natural thing in the 
world. She did not heed, if she heard, the busy 
and wondering gossip of relations and acquaintances, 
gossip that has no less currency among the Friends 
than elsewhere because it is whispered slyly and 
creeps about in an undertone. 

Ruth was absorbed, and for the first time in her 
life thoroughly happy—happy in the freedom of her 
life, and in the keen enjoyment of the investigation 
that broadened its field day by day. She was in 
high spirits when she came home to spend First 
Days; the house was full of her gaiety and her 
merry laugh, and the children wished that Ruth 
would never go away again. But her mother 
noticed, with a little anxiety, the sometimes flushed 
face, and the sign of an eager spirit in the kindling 
eyes, and, as well, the serious air of determination 
and endurance in her face at unguarded moments. 

The college was a small one, and it sustained itself 
not without difficulty in this city, which is so con- 
servative, and is yet the origin of so many radical 
movements. There were not more than a dozen 
attendants on the lectures all together, so that the 
enterprise had the air of an experiment, and the 
fascination of pioneering for those engaged in it. 

149 


MARK TWAIN 


There was one woman physician driving about town 
in her carriage, attacking the most violent diseases 
in all quarters with persistent courage, like a mod- 
ern Bellona in her war-chariot, who was popularly 
supposed to gather in fees to the amount of ten to 
twenty thousand dollars a year. Perhaps some of 
these students looked forward to the near day when 
they would support such a practice and a husband 
besides, but it is unknown that any of them ever 
went further than practice in hospitals and in their 
own nurseries, and it is feared that some of them 
were quite as ready as their sisters, in emergencies, 
tow ecallica, man.” 

If Ruth had any exaggerated expectations of a 
professional life, she kept them to herself, and was 
known to her fellows of the class simply as a cheer- 
ful, sincere student, eager in her investigations, and 
never impatient at anything, except an insinuation 
that women had not as much mental capacity for 
science as men. 

‘“They really say,” said one young Quaker sprig 
to another youth of his age, ‘‘that Ruth Bolton is 
really going to be a sawbones, attends lectures, cuts 
up bodies, and all that. She’s cool enough for a sur- 
geon, anyway.” He spoke feelingly, for he had very 
likely been weighed in Ruth’s calm eyes sometime, 
and thoroughly scared by the little laugh that ac- 
companied a puzzling reply to one of his conversa- 
tional nothings. Such young gentlemen, at this 
time, did not come very distinctly into Ruth’s hori- 
zon, except as amusing circumstances. 

About the details of her student life, Ruth said 


150 


THE GILDED AGE 


very little to her friends, but they had reason to 
know, afterward, that it required all her nerve and 
the almost complete exhaustion of her physical 
strength, to carry her through. She began her 
anatomical practice upon detached portions of the 
human frame, which were brought into the demon- 
strating-room—dissecting the eye, the ear, and a 
small tangle of muscles and nerves—an occupation 
which had not much more savor of death in it than 
the analysis of a portion of a plant out of which the 
life went when it was plucked up by the roots. 
Custom inures the most sensitive persons to that 
which is at first most repellent; and in the late war 
we saw the most delicate women, who could not at 
home endure the sight of blood, become so used to 
scenes of carnage, that they walked the hospitals 
and the margins of battle-fields, amid the poor rem- 
nants of torn humanity, with as perfect self-posses- 
sion as if they were strolling in a flower garden. 

It happened that Ruth was one evening deep in a 
line of investigation which she could not finish or 
understand without demonstration, and so eager was 
she in it, that it seemed as if she could not wait till 
the next day. She, therefore, persuaded a fellow- 
student, who was reading that evening with her, to 
go down to the dissecting-room of the college, and 
ascertain what they wanted to know by an hour’s 
work there. Perhaps, also, Ruth wanted to test her 
own nerve, and to see whether the power of asso- 
ciation was stronger in her mind than her own 
will. 

The janitor of the shabby and comfortless old 


I5I 


MARK TWAIN 


building admitted the girls, not without suspicion, 
and gave them lighted candles, which they would 
need, without other remark than ‘‘there’s a new 
one, Miss,’’ as the girls went up the broad stairs. 

They climbed to the third story, and paused be- 
fore a door, which they unlocked, and which ad- 
mitted them into a long apartment, with a row of 
windows on one side and one at the end. The 
room was without light, save from the stars and the 
candles the girls carried, which revealed to them 
dimly two long and several small tables, a few 
benches and chairs, a couple of skeletons hanging 
on the wall, a sink, and cloth-covered heaps of 
something upon the tables here and there. 

The windows were open, and the cool night wind 
came in strong enough to flutter a white covering 
now and then, and to shake the loose casements. 
But all the sweet odors of the night could not take 
from the room a faint suggestion of mortality. 

The young ladies paused a moment. The room 
itself was familiar enough, but night makes almost 
any chamber eery, and especially such a room of 
detention as this where the mortal parts of the un- 
buried might almost be supposed to be visited, on 
the sighing night winds, by the wandering spirits of 
their late tenants. : 

Opposite and at some distance across the roofs of 
lower buildings, the girls saw a tall edifice, the long 
upper story of which seemed to be a dancing-hall. 
The windows of that were also open, and through 
them they heard the scream of the jiggered and 
tortured violin, and the pump, pump of the oboe, 

152 


THE GILDED AGE 


and saw the moving shapes of men and women in 
quick transition, and heard the prompter’s drawl. 

‘I wonder,’’ said Ruth, “‘what the girls dancing 
there would think if they saw us, or knew that there 
was such a room as this so near them.” 

She did not speak very loud, and, perhaps un- 
consciously, the girls drew near to each other as 
they approached the long table in the center of the 
room. A straight object lay upon it, covered with 
a sheet. This was doubtless ‘“‘the new one” of 
which the janitor spoke. Ruth advanced, and with 
a not very steady hand lifted the white covering 
from the upper part of the figure and turned it 
down. Both the girls started. It was a negro. 
The black face seemed to defy the pallor of death, 
and asserted an ugly life-likeness that was frightful. 
Ruth was as pale as the white sheet, and her com- 
rade whispered, ‘‘Come away, Ruth, it is awful.” 

Perhaps it was the wavering light of the candles, 
perhaps it was only the agony from a death of pain, 
but the repulsive black face seemed to wear a scowl 
that said, ‘‘Haven’t you yet done with the outcast, 
persecuted black man, but you must now haul him 
from his grave, and send even your women to dis- 
member his body?” 

Who is this dead man, one of thousands who died 
yesterday, and will be dust anon, to protest that 
science shall not turn his worthless carcass to some 
account? 

Ruth could have had no such thought, for with a 
pity in her sweet face, that for the moment over- 
came fear and disgust, she reverently replaced the 

153 


MARK TWAIN 


covering, and went away to her own table, as her 
companion did to hers. And there for an hour they 
worked at their several problems, without speaking, 
but not without an awe of the presence there, ‘‘the 
new one,” and not without an awful sense of life 
itself, as they heard the pulsations of the music and 
the light laughter from the dancing-hall. 

When, at length, they went away, and locked the 
dreadful room behind them, and came out into the 
street, where people were passing, they, for the first 
time, realized, in the relief they felt, what a nervous 
strain they had been under. 


CHAPTER XVI 


MODEL RAILROAD ENGINEER. SURVEY TO STONE’S 
LANDING 


ee Taetey Siyee 
Todtenbuch, 117, 1.3. 


HILE Ruth was thus absorbed in her new oc- 

cupation, and the spring was wearing away, 
Philip and his friends were still detained at the 
Southern Hotel. The great contractors had con- 
cluded their business with the state and railroad 
officials and with the lesser contractors, and departed 
for the East. But the serious illness of one of the 
engineers kept Philip and Henry in the city and 
occupied in alternate watchings. 

Philip wrote to Ruth of the new acquaintance 
they had made, Colonel Sellers, an enthusiastic and 
hospitable gentleman, very much interested in the 
development of the country, and in their success. 
They had not had an opportunity to visit at his 
place “‘up in the country’”’ yet, but the Colonel 
often dined with them, and in confidence, confided 
to them his projects, and seemed to take a great 
hking to them, especially to his friend Harry. It 

155 


MARK TWAIN 


was true that he never seemed to have ready money, 
but he was engaged in very large operations. 

The correspondence was not very brisk between 
these two young persons, so differently occupied; 
for though Philip wrote long letters, he got brief 
ones in reply, full of sharp little observations how- 
ever, such as one concerning Colonel Sellers, namely, 
that such men dined at their house every week. 

Ruth’s proposed occupation astonished Philip im- 
mensely, but while he argued it and discussed it, he 
did not dare hint to her his fear that it would inter- 
fere with his most cherished plans. He too sin- 
cerely respected Ruth’s judgment to make any pro- 
test, however, and he would have defended her 
course against the world. 

This enforced waiting at St. Louis was very irk- 
some to Philip. His money was running away, for 
one thing, and he longed to get into the field, and 
see for himself what chance there was for a fortune 
or even an occupation. The contractors had given 
the young men leave to join the engineer corps as 
soon as they could, but otherwise had made no 
provision for them, and in fact had left them with 
only the most indefinite expectations of something 
large in the future. 

Harry was entirely happy, in his circumstances. 
He very soon knew everybody, from the governor 
of the state down to the waiters of the hotel. He 
had the Wall Street slang at his tongue’s end; he 
always talked like a capitalist, and entered with 
enthusiasm into all the land and railway schemes 
with which the air was thick. 

156 


THE GILDED AGE 


Colonel Sellers and Harry talked together by the 
hour and by the day. Harry informed his new 
friend that he was going out with the engineer corps 
of the Salt Lick Pacific Extension, but that wasn’t 
his real business. 

‘“‘T’m to have, with another party,” said Harry, 
“a big contract in the road, as soon as it is let; 
and, meantime, I’m with the engineers to spy out 
the best land and the depot sites.”’ 

“It’s everything,’ suggested the Colonel, ‘“‘in 
knowing where to invest. I’ve known people throw 
away their money because they were too conse- 
quential to take Sellers’s advice. Others, again, 
have made their pile on taking it. I’ve looked over 
the ground, I’ve been studying it for twenty years. 
You can’t put your finger on a spot in the map of 
Missouri that I don’t know as if I’d madeit. When 
you want to place anything,” continued the Colonel, 
confidently, ‘‘just let Beriah Sellers know. That’s 
all.”’ 

“Oh, I haven’t got much in ready money I can 
lay my hands on now, but if a fellow could do any- 
thing with fifteen or twenty thousand dollars, as a 
beginning, I shall draw for that when I see the right 
opening.’’ 

‘Well, that’s something, that’s something, fifteen 
or twenty thousand dollars, say twenty—as an ad- 
vance,’’ said the Colonel reflectively, as if turning 
over his mind for a project that could be entered 
on with such a trifling sum. 

“Tl tell you what it is—but only to you, Mr. 
Brierly, only to you, mind; I’ve got a little project 

157 


’ 


MARK TWAIN 


that I’ve been keeping. It looks small, looks small 
on paper, but it’s got a big future. What should 
you say, sir, to a city, built up like the rod of Alad- 
din had touched it, built up in two years, where 
now you wouldn’t expect it any more than you’d 
expect a lighthouse on the top of Pilot Knob? and 
you could own the land! It can be done, sir. It 
can be done!” 

The Colonel hitched up his chair close to Harry, 
laid his hand on his knee, and, first looking about 
him, said in a low voice, ‘‘The Salt Lick Pacific 
Extension is going to run through Stone’s Landing! 
The Almighty never laid out a cleaner piece of level 
prairie for a city; and it’s the natural center of all 
that region of hemp and tobacco.”’ 

‘‘What makes you think the road will go there? 
It’s twenty miles, on the map, off the straight line 
of the road?” 

‘You can’t tell what is the straight line till the 
engineers have been over it. Between us, I have 
talked with Jeff Thompson, the division engineer. 
He understands the wants of Stone’s Landing, and 
the claims of the inhabitants—who are to be there. 
Jeff says that a railroad is for the accommodation of 
the people and not for the benefit of gophers; and 
if he don’t run this to Stone’s Landing he'll be 
damned! You ought to know Jeff; he’s one of the 
most enthusiastic engineers in this Western country, 
and one of the best fellows that ever looked through 
the bottom of a glass.”’ 

The recommendation was not undeserved. ‘There 
was nothing that Jeff wouldn’t do, to accommodate 

158 


THE GILDED AGE 


a friend, from sharing his last dollar with him, to 
winging him in a duel. When he understood from 
Colonel Sellers how the land lay at Stone’s Landing, 
he cordially shook hands with that gentleman, asked 
him to drink, and fairly roared out, ‘‘Why, God 
bless my soul, Colonel, a word from one Virginia 
gentleman to another is ‘nuff ced.’ There’s Stone’s 
Landing been waiting for a railroad more than four 
thousand years, and damme if she sha’n’t have it.”’ 

Philip had not so much faith as Harry in Stone’s 
Landing when the latter opened the project to him, 
but Harry talked about it as if he already owned 
that incipient city. 

Harry thoroughly believed in all his projects and 
inventions, and lived day by day in their golden 
atmosphere. Everybody liked the young fellow, 
for how could they help liking one of such engaging 
manners and large fortune? The waiters at the hotel 
would do more for him than for any other guest, and 
he made a great many acquaintances among the 
people of St. Louis, who liked his sensible and 
liberal views about the development of the Western 
country, and about St. Louis. He said it ought to 
be the national capital. Harry made partial arrange- 
ments with several of the merchants for furnishing 
supplies for his contract on the Salt Lick Pacific Ex- 
tension; consulted the maps with the engineers, and 
went over the profiles with the contractors, figuring 
out estimates for bids. He was exceedingly busy 
with those things when he was not at the bedside of 
his sick acquaintance, or arranging the details of his 
speculation with Colonel Sellers. 

159 


MARK TWAIN 


Meantime the days went along and the weeks, 
and the money in Harry’s pocket got lower and 
lower. He was just as liberal with what he had as 
before; indeed, it was his nature to be free with his 
money or with that of others, and he could lend or 
spend a dollar with an air that made it seem like 
ten. At length, at the end of one week, when his 
hotel bill was presented, Harry found not a cent 
in his pocket to meet it. He carelessly remarked to 
the landlord that he was not that day in funds, 
but he would draw on New York, and he sat down 
and wrote to the contractors in that city a glowing 
letter about the prospects of the road, and asked 
them to advance a hundred or two, until he got at 
work. No reply came. He wrote again, in an un- 
offended businesslike tone, suggesting that he had 
better draw at three days. A short answer came to 
this, simply saying that money was very tight in 
Wall Street just then, and that he had better join the 
engineer corps as soon as he could. 

But the bill had to be paid, and Harry took it 
to Philip, and asked him if he thought he hadn’t 
better draw on his uncle. Philip had not much faith 
in Harry’s power of ‘‘drawing,’’ and told him that 
he would pay the bill himself. Whereupon Harry 
dismissed the matter then and thereafter from his 
thoughts, and, like a light-hearted good fellow as he 
was, gave himself no more trouble about his bcard- 
bills. Philip paid them, swollen as they were with 
a monstrous list of extras; but he seriously counted 
the diminishing bulk of his own hoard, which was all 
the money he had in the world. Had he not tacitlv 


160 


te CiLDED AGE 


agreed to share with Harry to the last in this adven- 
ture, and would not the generous fellow divide with 
him if he, Philip, were in want and Harry had any- 
thing? 

The fever at length got tired of tormenting the 
stout young engineer, who lay sick at the hotel, and 
left him, very thin, a little sallow but an ‘“‘accli- 
mated’? man. Everybody said he was “‘acclimated”’ 
now, and said it cheerfully. What it is to be ac- 
climated to Western fevers no two persons exactly 
agree. Some say it is a sort of vaccination that 
renders death by some malignant type of fever less 
probable. Some regard it as a sort of initiation, 
like that into the Odd Fellows, which renders one 
liable to his regular dues thereafter. Others con- 
sider it merely the acquisition of a habit of taking 
every morning before breakfast a dose of bitters, 
composed of whisky and asafcetida, out of the 
acclimation jug. 

Jeff Thompson afterward told Philip that he once 
asked Senator Atchison, then acting vice-president 
of the United States, about the possibility of accli- 
mation; he thought the opinion of the second officer 
of our great government would be valuable on this 
point. They were sitting together on a bench before 
a country tavern, in the free converse permitted by 
our democratic habits. 

“I suppose, Senator, that you have become 
acclimated to this country?” 

“Well,” said the vice-president, crossing his legs, 
pulling his wideawake down over his forehead, 
causing a passing chicken to hop quickly one side 

161 


MARK TWAIN 


by the accuracy of his aim, and speaking with sena- 
torial deliberation, ‘‘I think I have. I’ve been here 
twenty-five years, and dash dash my dash to dash, if 
I haven’t entertained twenty-five separate and dis- 
tinct earthquakes, one a year. The nigegro is the 
only person who can stand the fever and ague of 
this region.” 

The convalescence of the engineer was the signal 
for breaking up quarters at St. Louis, and the 
young fortune-hunters started up the river in good. 
spirits. It was only the second time either of them 
had been upon a Mississippi steamboat, and nearly 
everything they saw had the charm of novelty. Col- 
onel Sellers was at the landing to bid them good-by. 

“T shall send you up that basket of champagne by 
the next boat; no, no; no thanks; you'll find it not 
bad in camp,”’ he cried out as the plank was hauled in. 
““My respects to Thompson. Tell him to sight for 
stone’s. Let meknow, Mr. Brierly, whenyou are ready 
to locate; I’ll come over from Hawkeye. Good-by.”’ 

And the last the young fellows saw of the Colonel, 
he was waving his hat, and beaming prosperity and 
good luck. 

The voyage was delightful, and was not long 
enough to become monotonous. The travelers 
scarcely had time indeed to get accustomed to the 
splendors of the great saloon where the tables were 
spread for meals, a marvel of paint and gilding, its 
ceiling hung with fancifully cut tissue-paper of many 
colors, festooned and arranged in endless patterns. 
The whole was more beautiful than a barber’s shop. 
The printed bill of fare at dinner was longer and 

162 


THE GILDED AGE 


more varied, the proprietors justly boasted, than 
that of any hotel in New York. It must have been 
the work of an author of talent and imagination, 
and it surely was not his fault if the dinner itself 
was to a certain extent a delusion, and if the guests 
got something that tasted pretty much the same 
whatever dish they ordered; nor was it his fault if a 
general flavor of rose in all the dessert dishes sug- 
gested that they had passed through the barber’s 
saloon on their way from the kitchen. 

The travelers landed at a little settlement on the 
left bank, and at once took horses for the camp in 
the interior, carrying their clothes and blankets 
strapped behind the saddles. Harry was dressed as 
we have seen him once before, and his long and 
shining boots attracted not a little the attention of 
the few persons they met on the road, and especially 
of the bright-faced wenches who lightly stepped 
along the highway, picturesque in their colored 
kerchiefs, carrying light baskets, or riding upon 
mules and balancing before them a heavier load. 

Harry sang fragments of operas and talked about 
their fortune. Philip even was excited by the sense 
of freedom and adventure, and the beauty of the 
landscape. The prairie, with its new grass and 
unending acres of brilliant flowers—chiefly the 
innumerable varieties of phlox—bore the look of 
years of cultivation, and the occasional open groves 
of white oaks gave it a parklike appearance. It 
was hardly unreasonable to expect to see at any 
moment the gables and square windows of an 
Elizabethan mansion in one of the well-kept groves. 

163 


MARK TWAIN 


Toward sunset of the third day, when the young 
gentlemen thought they ought to be near the town 
of Magnolia, near which they had been directed to 
find the engineers’ camp, they descried a log house 
and drew up before it to inquire the way. Half 
the building was store, and half was dwelling-house. 
At the door of the latter stood a negress with a 
bright turban on her head, to whom Philip called: 

‘‘Can you tell me, auntie, how far it is to the 
town of Magnolia?” 

“Why, bress you chile,’ laughed the woman, 
““you’s dere now.”’ 

It was true. This log house was the compactly 
built town, and all creation was its suburbs. The 
engineers’ camp was only two or three miles distant. 

““You’s boun’ to find it,”’ directed auntie, ‘‘if 
you don’t keah nuffin "bout de road, and go fo’ de 
sundown.”’ 

A brisk gallop brought the riders in sight of the 
twinkling light of the camp, just as the stars came 
out. It lay in a little hollow, where a small stream 
ran through a sparse grove of young white oaks. A 
half-dozen tents were pitched under the trees, horses 
and oxen were corraled at a little distance, and a 
group of men sat on camp-stools or lay on blankets 
about a bright fire. The twang of a banjo became 
audible as they drew nearer, and they saw a couple 
of negroes, from some neighboring plantation, 
‘“breaking down” a juba in approved style, amid 
the “hi, hi’s’’ of the spectators. 

Mr. Jeff Thompson, for it was the camp of this 
redoubtable engineer, gave the travelers a hearty 

164 


THE GILDED AGE 


welcome, offered them ground-room in his own 
tent, ordered supper, and set out a small jug, a 
drop from which he declared necessary on account 
of the chill of the evening. 

“‘T never saw an Eastern man,’’ said Jeff, ‘‘who 
knew how to drink from a jug with one hand. It’s 
as easy as lying. So.” He grasped the handle 
with the right hand, threw the jug back upon his 
arm, and applied his lips to the nozzle. It was an 
act as graceful as it was simple. ‘‘Besides,’’ said 
Mr. Thompson, setting it down, “it puts every 
man on his honor as to quantity.”’ 

Early to turn in was the rule of the camp, and by 
nine o'clock everybody was under his blanket, ex- 
cept Jeff himself, who worked awhile at his table 
over his field-book, and then arose, stepped outside 
the tent door and sang, in a strong and not unmelo- 
dious tenor, the ‘Star-Spangled Banner”’ from be- 
ginning toend. It proved to be his nightly practice 
to let off the unexpended steam of his conversational 
powers, in the words of this stirring song. 

It was a long time before Philip got to sleep. He 
saw the firelight, he saw the clear stars through the 
tree-tops, he heard the gurgle of the stream, the 
stamp of the horses, the occasional barking of the 
dog which followed the cook’s wagon, the hooting 
of an owl; and when these failed he saw Jeff, stand- 
ing on a battlement, mid the rocket’s red glare, and 
heard him sing,‘‘Oh, say, can you see?” It was 
the first time he had ever slept on the ground. 


CHAPTER XVII 


STONE’S LANDING BECOMES CITY OF NAPOLEON— 
ON PAPER 


—“We have view’d it, 
And measur’d it within all by the scale: 
The richest tract of land, love, in the kingdom! 
There will be made seventeen or eighteen millions, 
Or more, as’t may be handled! 
Ben Fonson. The Devil is an Ass. 


OBODY dressed more like an engineer than Mr. 

Henry Brierly. The completeness of his ap- 
pointments was the envy of the corps, and the gay 
fellow himself was the admiration of the camp ser- 
vants, axmen, teamsters, and cooks. 

“I reckon you didn’t git them boots nowher’s 
this side o’ Sent Louis?’ queried the tall Missouri 
youth who acted as commissary’s assistant. 

‘“No, New York.” 

‘Yas, I’ve heern 0’ New York,”’ continued the but- 
ternut lad, attentively studying each item of Harry’s 
dress, and endeavoring to cover his design with inter- 
esting conversation. ‘‘’N’ there’s Massachusetts.”’ 

wltcs notaarvofixs 

‘“‘T’ve heern Massachusetts was a of a place. 
Le’s see, what state’s Massachusetts in?” 

‘‘Massachusetts,’”’ kindly replied Harry, ‘‘is in the 
state of Boston.” 


166 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Abolish’n wa’n’t it? They must ’a’ cost right 
smart,” referring to the boots. 

Harry shouldered his rod and went to the field, 
tramped over the prairie by day, and figured up 
results at night, with the utmost cheerfulness and 
industry, and plotted the line on the profile paper, 
without, however, the least idea of engineering, 
practical or theoretical. Perhaps there was not a 
great deal of scientific knowledge in the entire corps, 
nor was very much needed. They were making 
what is called a preliminary survey, and the chief 
object of a preliminary survey was to get up an 
excitement about the road, to interest every town 
in that part of the state in it, under the belief that 
the road would run through it, and to get the aid of 
every planter upon the prospect that a station would 
be on his land. 

Mr. Jeff Thompson was the most popular engineer 
who could be found for this work. He did not 
bother himself much about details or practicabilities 
of location, but ran merrily along, sighting from the 
top of one divide to the top of another, and striking 
‘‘plumb’’ every town-site and big plantation within 
twenty or thirty miles of his route. In his own 
language he ‘‘just went booming.” 

This course gave Harry an opportunity, as he 
said, to learn the practical details of engineering, 
and it gave Philip a chance to see the country, and 
to judge for himself what prospect of a fortune it 
offered. Both he and Harry got the “refusal” of 
more than one plantation as they went along, and 
wrote urgent letters to their Eastern correspondents, 

167 


MARK TWAIN 


upon the beauty of the land and the certainty that 
it would quadruple in value as soon as the road was 
finally located. It seemed strange to them that 
capitalists did not flock’ out there and secure this 
land. 

They had not been in the field over two weeks 
when Harry wrote to his friend, Colonel Sellers, that 
he’d better be on the move, for the line was certain 
to go to Stone’s Landing. Any one who looked at 
the line on the map, as it was laid down from day 
to day, would have been uncertain which way it was 
going; but Jeff had declared that in his judgment 
the only practicable route from the point they then 
stood on was to follow the divide to Stone’s Land- 
ing, and it was generally understood that that town 
would be the next one hit. 

‘‘We’ll make it, boys,” said the chief, “‘if we have 
to go in a balloon.” 

And make it they did. In less than a week, this 
indomitable engineer had carried his moving caravan 
over slues and branches, across bottoms and along 
divides, and pitched his tents in the very heart of 
the city of Stone’s Landing. 

“Well, I’ll be dashed,’ was heard the cheery 
voice of Mr. Thompson, as he stepped outside the 
tent door at sunrise next morning. ‘“‘If this don’t 
get me. I say, you, Grayson, get out your sighting- 
iron and see if you can find old Sellers’s town. 
Blame me if we wouldn’t have run plumb by it if 
twilight had held on a little longer. Oh! Sterling, 
Brierly, get up and see the city. There’s a steam- 
boat just coming round the bend.”’ And Jeff roared 

168 


tie GILDED AGE 


with laughter. ‘‘The mayor ’Il be round here to 
breakfast.”’ 

The feilows turned out of the tents, rubbing their 
eyes, and stared about them. They were camped 
on the second bench of the narrow bottom of a 
crooked, sluggish stream, that was some five rods 
wide in the present good stage of water. Before 
them were a dozen log cabins, with stick and mud 
chimneys, irregularly disposed on either side of a 
not very well defined road, which did not seem to 
know its own mind exactly, and, after straggling 
through the town, wandered off over the rolling 
prairie in an uncertain way, as if it had started for 
nowhere and was quite likely to reach its destina- 
tion. Just as it left the town, however, it was 
cheered and assisted by a guideboard, upon which 
was the legend ‘‘10 Mils to Hawkeye.”’ 

The road had never been made except by the 
travel over it, and at this season—the rainy June— 
it was a way of ruts cut in the black soil, and of 
fathomless mud-holes. In the principal street of 
the city it had received more attention; for hogs, 
great and small, rooted about in it and wallowed in 
it, turning the street into a liquid quagmire which 
could only be crossed on pieces of plank thrown here 
and there. 

About the chief cabin, which was the store and 
grocery of this mart of trade, the mud was move 
liquid than elsewhere, and the rude platform in front 
of it and the dry-goods boxes mounted thereon were 
places of refuge for all the loafers of the place. 
Down by the stream was a dilapidated building 

169 


MARK TWAIN 


which served for a hemp warehouse, and a shaky 
wharf extended out from it into the water. In fact, 
a flatboat was there moored by it, its setting poles 
lying across the gunwales. Above the town the 
stream was crossed by a crazy wooden bridge, the 

supports of which leaned all ways in the soggy soil; 
the absence of a plank here and there in the flooring 
made the crossing of the bridge faster than a walk 
an offense not necessary to be prohibited by law. 

‘This, gentlemen,’ said Jeff, ‘‘is Columbus 
River, alias Goose Run. If it was widened, and 
deepened, and straightened, and made long enough, 
it would be one of the finest rivers in the Western 
country.” 

As the sun rose and sent his level beams along 
the stream, the thin stratum of mist, or malaria, 
rose also and dispersed, but the light was not able 
to enliven the dull water nor give any hint of its 
apparently fathomless depth. Venerable mud- 
turtles crawled up and roosted upon the old logs in 
the stream, their backs glistening in the sun, the 
first inhabitants of the metropolis to begin the ac- 
tive business of the day. 

It was not long, however, before smoke began to 
issue from the city chimneys; and before the engi- 
neers had finished breakfast they were the object of 
the curious inspection of six or eight boys and men, 
who lounged into the camp and gazed about them 
with languid interest, their hands in their pockets, 
every one. 

‘‘Good morning, gentlemen,’’ called out the chief 
engineer, from the table. 

170 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Good mawning,’’ drawled out the spokesman of 
the party. ‘‘I allow thish-yer’s the railroad, I heern 
it was a-comin’.”’ 

“Ves, this is the railroad, all but the rails and 
the iron-horse.”’ 

“T reckon you kin git all the rails you want 
outen my white-oak timber over thar,’’ replied the 
first speaker, who appeared to be a man of property 
and willing to strike up a trade. 

“You'll have to negotiate with the contractors 
about the rails, sir,’’ said Jeff; “‘here’s Mr. Brierly, 
I’ve no doubt would like to buy your rails when 
the time comes.” 

‘‘Oh,”’ said the man, “I thought maybe you’d 
fetch the whole bilin’ along with you. But if you 
want rails, I’ve got ’em, haint I, Eph?” 

‘“Heaps,”’ said Eph, without taking his eyes off 
the group at the table. 

‘Well,’ said Mr. Thompson, rising from his seat 
and moving toward his tent, ‘“‘the railroad has 
come to Stone’s Landing, sure; I move we take a 
drink on it all round.” 

The proposal met with universal favor. Jeff gave 
prosperity to Stone’s Landing and navigation to 
Goose Run, and the toast was washed down with 
gusto, in the simple fluid of corn, and with the 
return compliment that a railroad was a good 
thing, and that Jeff Thompson was no slouch. 

About ten o’clock a horse and wagon was descried 
making a slow approach to the camp over the prairie. 
As it drew near, the wagon was seen to contain a 
portly gentleman, who hitched impatiently forward 

171 


MARK TWAIN 


on his seat, shook the reins and gently touched up 
his horse, in the vain attempt to communicate his 
own energy to that dull beast, and looked eagerly 
at the tents. When the conveyance at length drew 
up to Mr. Thompson’s door, the gentleman de- 
scended with great deliberation, straightened him- 
self up, rubbed his hands, and, beaming satisfaction 
from every part of his radiant frame, advanced to 
the group that was gathered to welcome him, and 
which had saluted him by name as soon as he came 
within hearing. 

‘*“Welcome to Napoleon, gentlemen, welcome. I 
am proud to see you here, Mr. Thompson. You 
are looking well, Mr. Sterling. This is the country, 
sir. Right glad to see you, Mr. Brierly. You got 
that basket of champagne? No?’ Those blasted 
river thieves! I'll never send anything more by 
’em. The best brand, Roederer. ‘The last I had in 
my cellar, from a lot sent me by Sir George Gore 
—took him out on a buffalo-hunt, when he visited 
our country. Is always sending me some trifle. 
You haven’t looked about any yet, gentlemen? It’s 
in the rough yet, in the rough. Those buildings 
will all have to come down. That’s the place for 
the public square, court-house, hotels, churches, 
jail—all that sort of thing. About where we stand, 
the deepo. How does that strike your engineering 
eye, Mr. Thompson? Down yonder the business 
streets, running to the wharves. The University up 
there, on rising ground, sightly place, see the river 
for miles. That’s Columbus River, only forty-nine 
miles to the Missouri. You see what it is, placid, 

172 


tre GilLDED AGE 


steady, no current to interfere with navigation, 
wants widening in places and dredging, dredge out 
the harbor and raise a levee in front of the town; 
made by nature on purpose for a mart. Look at 
all this country, not another building within ten 
miles, no other navigable stream, lay of the land 
points right here; hemp, tobacco, corn, must come 
here. The railroad will do it, Napoleon won’t know 
itself in a year.”’ 

‘‘Don’t now, evidently,’’ said Philip aside to 
Harry. ‘‘Have you breakfasted, Colonel?” 

“Hastily. Cup of coffee. Can’t trust any coffee 
I don’t import myself. But I put up a basket of 
provisions; wife would put in a few delicacies, 
women always will, and a half-dozen of that Bur- 
gundy, I was telling you of, Mr. Brierly. By the 
way, you never got to dine with me.’’ And the 
Colonel strode away to the wagon and looked under 
the seat for the basket. 

Apparently it was not there. For the Colonel 
raised up the flap, looked in front and behind, and 
then exclaimed: 

‘‘Confound it! That cotnes of not doing a thing 
yourself. I trusted to the women folks to set that 
basket in the wagon, and it ain’t there.”’ 

The camp cook speedily prepared a savory break- 
fast for the Colonel, broiled chicken, eggs, corn- 
bread, and coffee, to which he did ample justice, 
and topped off with a drop of Old Bourbon, from 
Mr. Thompson’s private store, a brand which he 
said he knew well, he should think it came from his 
own sideboard. 


”? 


173 


MARK TWAIN 


While the engineer corps went to the field, to run 
back a couple of miles and ascertain, approximately, 
if a road could ever get down to the Landing, and 
to sight ahead across the Run, and see if it could 
ever get out again, Colonel Sellers and Harry sat 
down and began to roughly map out the city of 
Napoleon on a large piece of drawing-paper. 

‘‘T’ve got the refusal of a mile square here,” said 
the Colonel, ‘“‘in our names, for a year, with a 
quarter interest reserved for the four owners.”’ 

They laid out the town liberally, not lacking 
room, leaving space for the railroad to come in, and 
for the river as it was to be when improved. 

The engineers reported that the railroad could 
come in, by taking a little sweep and crossing the 
stream on a high bridge, but the grades would be 
steep. Colonel Sellers said he didn’t care so much 
about the grades, if the road could only be made to 
reach the elevators on the river. The next day Mr. 
Thompson made a hasty survey of the stream for a 
mile or two, so that the Colonel and Harry were 
enabled to show on their map how nobly that would 
accommodate the city. - Jeff took a little writing 
from the Colonel and Harry for a prospective share, 
but Philip declined to join in, saying that he had no 
money, and didn’t want to make engagements he 
couldn’t fulfil. 

The next morning the camp moved on, followed 
till it was out of sight by the listless eyes of the 
group in front of the store, one of whom remarked 
that ‘‘he’d be doggoned if he ever expected to see 
that railroad any mo’.”’ 

174 


ie GILDED AGE 


Harry went with the Colonel to Hawkeye to 
complete their arrangements, a part of which 
was the preparation of a petition to Congress for 
the improvement of the navigation of Columbus 
River. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
LAURA DECEIVED BY A MOCK MARRIAGE 


“Olt 7ll-sOas > et 
ees ttlO:Olli---€0:3 
Bedda ag Idda. 
—‘E ve us lo covinentz qals er, 
Que voill que m prendatz a moiler. 
—Qu’en aissi l’a Dieus establida, 


Per que not pot esser partida.”” Roman de Jatfre. 
Raynouard. Lexique Roman, i. 139. 


IGHT years have passed since the death of Mr. 

Hawkins. Eight years are not many in the 
life of a nation or the history of a state, but they 
may be years of destiny that shall fix the current of - 
the century following. Such years were those that 
followed the little scrimmage on Lexington Com- 
mon. Such years were those that followed the 
double-shotted demand for the surrender of Fort 
Sumter. History is never done with inquiring of 
these years, and summoning witnesses about them, 
and trying to understand their significance. 

The eight years in America from 1860 to 1868 
uprooted institutions that were centuries old, 
changed the politics of a people, transformed the 
social life of half the country, and wrought so pro- 
foundly upon the entire national character that the 

176 


Tae GILDED AGE 


influence cannot be measured short of two or three 
generations. 

As we are accustomed to interpret the economy 
of providence, the life of the individual is as nothing 
to that of the nation or the race; but who can say, 
in the broader view and the more intelligent weight 
of values, that the life of one man is not more than 
that of a nationality, and that there is not a tribunal 
where the tragedy of one human soul shall not seem 
more significant than the overturning of any human 
institution whatever? 

When one thinks of the tremendous forces of the 
upper and the nether world which play for the 
mastery of the soul of a woman during the few years 
in which she passes from plastic girlhood to the ripe 
maturity of womanhood, he may well stand in awe 
before the momentous drama. 

What capacities she has of purity, tenderness, 
goodness; what capacities of vileness, bitterness, and 
evil. Nature must needs be lavish with the mother 
and creator of men, and center in her all the possi- 
bilities of life. And a few critical years can decide 
whether her life is to be full of sweetness and light, 
whether she is to be the vestal of a holy temple, or 
whether she will be the fallen priestess of a dese- 
crated shrine. There are women, it is true, who 
seem to be capable neither of rising much nor of 
falling.much, and whom a conventional life saves 
from any special development of character. 

But Laura was not one of them. She had the 
fatal gift of beauty, and that more fatal gift which 
does not always accompany mere beauty, the power 

177 


MARK TWAIN 


of fascination, a power that may, indeed, exist with- 
out beauty. She had will, and pride, and courage, 
and ambition, and she was left to be very much her 
own guide at the age when romance comes to the 
aid of passion, and when the awakening powers of 
her vigorous mind had little object on which to 
discipline themselves. 

The tremendous conflict that was fought in this 
girl’s soul none of those about her knew, and very 
few knew that her life had in it anything unusual or 
romantic or strange. 

. Those were troublous days in Hawkeye as well as 
in most other Missouri towns, days of confusion, 
when between Unionists and Confederate occupa- 
tions, sudden maraudings and bushwhackings and 
raids, individuals escaped observation or comment 
in actions that would have filled the town with 
scandal in quiet times. 

Fortunately, we only need to deal with Laura’s 
life at this period historically, and look back upon 
such portions of it as will serve to reveal the woman 
as she was at the time of the arrival of Mr. Harry 
Brierly in Hawkeye. 

The Hawkins family were settled there, and had 
a hard enough struggle with poverty and the neces- 
sity of keeping up appearances in accord with their 
own family pride and the large expectations they 
secretly cherished of a fortune in the Knobs of East 
Tennessee. How pinched they were perhaps no 
one knew but Clay, to whom they looked for almost 
their whole support. Washington had been in 
Hawkeye off and on, attracted away occasionally 

178 


tere “GILDED SAGE 


by some tremendous speculation, from which he in- 
variably returned to General Boswell’s office as poor 
as he went. He was the inventor of no one knew 
how many useless contrivances, which were not 
worth patenting, and his years had been passed in 
dreaming and planning to no purpose; until he was 
now a man of about thirty, without a profession 
or a permanent occupation, a tall, brown-haired, 
dreamy person of the best intentions and the frailest 
resolution. Probably, however, the eight years had 
been happier to him than to any others in his 
circle, for the time had been mostly spent in a 
blissful dream of the coming of enormous wealth. 

He went out with a company from Hawkeye to 
the war, and was not wanting in courage, but he 
would have been a better soldier if he had been 
less engaged in contrivances for circumventing the 
enemy by strategy unknown to the books. 

It happened to him to be captured in one of his 
self-appointed expeditions, but the Federal colonel 
released him, after a short examination, satisfied 
that he could most injure the Confederate forces 
opposed to the Unionists by returning him to his 
regiment. 

Colonel Sellers was of course a prominent man dur- 
ing the war. He was captain of the home guards in 
Hawkeye, and he never left home except upon one 
occasion, when, on the strength of a rumor, he 
executed a flank movement and fortified Stone’s 
Landing, a place which no one unacquainted with 
the country would be likely to find. 

‘“‘Gad,”’ said the Colonel afterward, ‘‘the Landing 

179 


MARK TWAIN 


is the key to upper Missouri, and it is the only 
place the enemy never captured. If other places 
had been defended as well as that was, the result 
would have been different, sir.”’ 

The Colonel had his own theories about war, as 
he had in other things. If everybody had stayed 
at home as he did, he said, the South never would 
have been conquered. For what would there have 
been to conquer? Mr. Jeff Davis was constantly 
writing him to take command of a corps in the Con- 
federate army, but Colonel Sellers said, no, his duty 
was at home. And he was by no means idle. He 
was the inventor of the famous air-torpedo, which 
came very near destroying the Union armies in 
Missouri, and the city of St. Louis itself. 

His plan was to fill a torpedo with Greek fire and 
poisonous and deadly missiles, attach it to a balloon, 
and then let it sail away over the hostile camp and 
explode at the right moment, when the time-fuse 
burned out. He intended to use this invention in 
the capture of St. Louis, exploding his torpedoes 
over the city, and raining destruction upon it until 
the army of occupation would gladly capitulate. 
He was unable to procure the Greek fire, but he 
constructed a vicious torpedo which would have 
answered the purpose, but the first one prematurely 
exploded in his woodhouse, blowing it clean away, 
and setting fire to his house. The neighbors helped 
him put out the conflagration, but they discouraged 
any more experiments of that sort. 

The patriotic old gentleman, however, planted so 
much powder and so many explosive contrivances in 

180 


Time Ghee DEDB® AGE 


the roads leading into Hawkeye, and then forgot the 
exact spots of danger, that people were afraid to 
travel the highways, and used to come to town 
across the fields. The Colonel’s motto was: ‘‘Mil- 
lions for defense, but not one cent for tribute.”’ 

When Laura came to Hawkeye she might have 
forgotten the annoyances of the gossips of Mur- 
pheysburg and have outlived the bitterness that was 
growing in her heart, if she had been thrown less 
upon herself, or if the surroundings of her life had 
been more congenial and helpful. But she had little 
society, less and less as she grew older that was 
congenial to her, and her mind preyed upon itself, 
and the mystery of her birth at once chagrined her 
and raised in her the most extravagant expectations. 

She was proud and she felt the sting of poverty. 
She could not but be conscious of her beauty also, 
and she was vain of that, and came to take a sort of 
delight in the exercise of her fascinations upon the 
rather loutish young men who came in her way and 
whom she despised. 

There was another world opened to her—a world 
of books. But it was not the best world of that sort, 
for the small libraries she had access to in Hawkeye 
were decidedly miscellaneous, and largely made up 
of romances and fictions which fed her imagination 
with the most exaggerated notions of life, and showed 
her men and women in a very false sort of heroism. 
From these stories she learned what a woman of 
keen intellect and some culture, joined to beauty 
and fascination of manner, might expect to accom- 
plish in society as she read of it; and along with these 

181 


MARK TWAIN 


ideas she imbibed other very crude ones in regard 
to the emancipation of woman. 

There were also other books—histories, biog- 
raphies of distinguished people, travels in far lands, 
poems, especially those of Byron, Scott, and Shelley 
and Moore, which she eagerly absorbed, and appro- 
priated therefrom what was to her liking. Nobody 
in Hawkeye had read so much or, after a fashion, 
studied so diligently as Laura. She passed for an 
accomplished girl, and no doubt thought herself 
one, as she was, judged by any standard near her. 

During the war there came to Hawkeye a Confed- 
erate officer, Colonel Selby, who was stationed there 
for a time, in command of that district. He was a 
handsome, soldierly man of thirty years, a graduate 
of the University of Virginia, and of distinguished 
family, if his story might be believed, and, it was 
evident, a man of the world and of extensive travel 
and adventure. 

To find in such an out-of-the-way country place 
a woman like Laura was a piece of good luck upon 
which Colonel Selby congratulated himself. He was 
studiously polite to her and treated her with a con- 
sideration to which she was unaccustomed. She 
had read of such men, but she had never seen one 
before, one so high-bred, so noble in sentiment, so 
entertaining in conversation, so engaging in manner. 

It is a long story; unfortunately it is an old story, 
and it need not be dwelt on. Laura loved him, and 
believed that his love for her was as pure and deep 
as her own. She worshiped him, and would have 
counted her life a little thing to give him, if he 

182 


THE GILDED AGE 


would only love her and let her feed the hunger of 
her heart upon him. 

The passion possessed her whole being, and lifted 
her up, till she seemed to walk on air. It was all 
true, then, the romances she had read, the bliss of 
love she had dreamed of. Why had she never 
noticed before how blithesome the world was, how 
jocund with love; the birds sang it, the trees whis- 
pered it to her as she passed, the very flowers he- 
neath her feet strewed the way as for a bridal march. 

When the Colonel went away they were engaged 
to be married, as soon as he could make certain 
arrangements which he represented to be necessary, 
and quit the army. 

He wrote to her from Harding, a small town in 
the southwest corner of the state, saying that he 
should be held in the service longer than he had 
expected, but that it would not be more than a few 
months, then he should be at liberty to take her to 
Chicago where he had property, and should have 
business, either now or as soon as the war was over, 
which he thought could not last long. Meantime 
why should they be separated? He was established 
in comfortable quarters, and if she could find com- 
pany and join him, they would be married, and gain 
so many more months of happiness. 

Was woman ever prudent when she loved? Laura 
went to Harding, the neighbors supposed, to nurse 
Washington, who had fallen ill there. 

Her engagement was, of course, known in Hawk- 
eye, and was indeed a matter of pride to her family. 
Mrs. Hawkins would have told the first inquirer 

183 


MARK TWAIN 


that Laura had gone to be married; but Laura had 
cautioned her; she did not want to be thought of, 
she said, as going in search of a husband; let the 
news come back after she was married. 

so she traveled to Harding on the pretense we 
have mentioned, and was married. She was mar- 
ried, but something must have happened on that 
very day or the next that alarmed her. Washington 
did not know then or after what it was, but Laura 
bound him not to send news of her marriage to 
Hawkeye yet, and to enjoin her mother not to speak 
of it. Whatever cruel suspicion or nameless dread 
this was, Laura tried bravely to put it away, and 
not let it cloud her happiness. 

Communication that summer, as may be imagined, 
was neither regular nor frequent between the remote 
Confederate camp at Harding and Hawkeye, and 
Laura was in a measure lost sight of—indeed, every 
one had troubles enough of his own without borrow- 
ing from his neighbors. 

Laura had given herself utterly to her husband, 
and if he had faults, if he was selfish, if he was some- 
times coarse, if he was dissipated, she did not or 
would not see it. It was the passion of her life, 
the time when her whole nature went to flood-tide 
and swept away all barriers. Was her husband ever 
cold or indifferent? She shut her eyes to every- 
thing but her sense of possession of her idol. 

Three months passed. One morning her husband 
informed her that he had been ordered South, and 
must go within two hours. 

“‘T can be ready,” said Laura, cheerfully. 

184 


THE GILDED AGE 
“But I can’t take you. You must go back to 


Hawkeye.”’ 
‘‘Can’t—take—-me?’’ Laura asked, with wonder in 
her eyes. ‘I can’t live without you. You said—”’ 


‘fO bother what I said’’—and the Colonel took 
up his sword to buckle it on, and then continued 
coolly, ‘‘the fact is, Laura, our romance is played 
out.” 

Laura heard, but she did not comprehend. She 
caught his arm and cried, ‘‘George, how can you 
joke so cruelly? I will go anywhere with you. I 
will wait anywhere. I can’t go back to Hawkeye.”’ 

‘“Well, go where you like. Perhaps,” continued 
he with a sneer, “‘you would do as well to wait 
here, for another colonel.”’ 

Laura’s brain whirled. She did not yet compre- 
hend. ‘“What doesthis mean? Where are you going?” 

“It means,’’ said the officer, in measured words, 
‘“‘that you haven’t anything to show for a legal 
marriage, and that I am going to New Orleans.” 

“It’s a lie, George, it’s a lie. I am your wife. 
I shall go. I shall follow you to New Orleans.”’ 

‘‘Perhaps my wife might not like it!’’ 

Laura raised her head, her eyes flamed with fire, 
she tried to utter a cry, and fell senseless on the 
floor. 

When she came to herself the Colonel was gone. 
Washington Hawkins stood at her bedside. Did she 
come to herself? Was there anything left in her 
heart but hate and bitterness, a sense of an in- 
famous wrong at the hands of the only man she 
had ever loved? 

185 


MARK TWAIN 


She returned to Hawkeye. With the exception 
of Washington and his mother, no one knew what 
had happened. The neighbors supposed that the 
engagement with Colonel Selby had fallen through. 
Laura was ill for a long time, but she recovered; she 
had that resolution in her that could conquer death 
almost. And with her health came back her beauty, 
and an added fascination, a something that might be 
mistaken for sadness. Is there a beauty in the 
knowledge of evil, a beauty that shines out in the 
face of a person whose inward life is transformed by 
some terrible experience? Is the pathos in the eyes 
of the Beatrice Cenci from her guilt or her inno- 
cence? 

Laura was not much changed. The lovely woman 
had a devil in her heart. That was all. 


CHAPTER XIX 


BRIERLY FLIRTS WITH LAURA, AND IS FASCINATED 


Wie entwideln (ih bod fhnelle 
Mus der fludtigfter Empfindung 
Letdenfdhaften ohne Grengew 
Unbd bie gartlidfte Verbindung? 
Tiglih wadft gu btefer Dame 
Meines Hergens tieffte Netgung, 
Unb bass fh in fie verltebt fet, 
Wird mir falt giir Uebergzergung,  Hethe. 


R. HARRY BRIERLY drew his pay as an 
engineer while he was living at the City Hotel 
in Hawkeye. Mr. Thompson had been kind enough 
to say that it didn’t make any difference whether 
he was with the corps or not; and although Harry 
protested to the Colonel daily and to Washington 
Hawkins that he must go back at once to the line 
and superintend the layout with reference to his 
contract, yet he did not go, but wrote instead long 
letters to Philip, instructing him to keep his eye 
out, and to let him know when any difficulty oc- 
curred that required his presence. 

Meantime Harry blossomed out in the society of 
Hawkeye, as he did in any society where fortune 
cast him and he had the slightest opportunity to 
expand. Indeed, the talents of a rich and accom- 
plished young fellow like Harry were not likely to 
go unappreciated in such a place. A land operator, 

187 


MARK TWAIN 


engaged in vast speculations, a favorite in the select 
circles of New York, in correspondence with brokers 
and bankers, intimate with public men at Wash- 
ington, one who could play the guitar and touch the 
banjo lightly, and who had an eye for a pretty girl, 
and knew the language of flattery, was welcome 
everywhere in Hawkeye. Even Miss Laura Haw- 
kins thought it worth while to use her fascinations 
upon him, and to endeavor to entangle the volatile 
fellow in the meshes of her attractions. 

‘‘Gad,” says Harry to the Colonel, ‘‘she’s a 
superb creature, she’d make a stir in New York, 
money or no money. ‘There are men I know would 
give her a railroad or an opera-house, or whatever 
she wanted—at least they’d promise.” 

Harry had a way of looking at women as he 
looked at anything else in the world he wanted, and 
he half resolved to appropriate Miss Laura, during 
his stay in Hawkeye. Perhaps the Colonel divined 
his thoughts, or was offended at Harry’s talk, for he 
replied: 

‘“No nonsense, Mr. Brierly. Nonsense won’t do 
in Hawkeye, not with my friends. The Hawkins 
blood is good blood, all the way from Tennessee. 
The Hawkinses are under the weather now, but their 
Tennessee property is millions when it comes into 
market.”’ 

““Of course, Colonel. Not the least offense in- 
tended. But you can see she is a fascinating woman. 
I was only thinking, as to this appropriation, now, 
what such a woman could do in Washington. All 
correct, too, all correct. Common thing, I assure 

188 


THE GILDED AGE 


you, in Washington; the wives of Senators, Repre- 
sentatives, Cabinet officers, all sorts of wives, and 
some who are not wives, use their influence. You 
want an appointment? Do you go to Senator X? 
Not much. You get on the right side of his wife. 
Is it an appropriation? You'd go straight to the 
committee, or to the Interior Office, I suppose? 
You’d learn better than that. It takes a woman to 
get anything through the Land Office. I tell you, 
Miss Laura would fascinate an appropriation right 
through the Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives in one sessicn, if she was in Washington, as 
your friend, Colonel, of course as your friend.”’ 

‘‘Would you have her sign our petition?” asked 
the Colonel, innocently. 

Harry laughed. ‘‘Women don’t get anything by 
petitioning Congress; nobody does, that’s for form. 
Petitions are referred somewhere, and that’s the 
last of them; you can’t refer a handsome woman so 
easily, when she is present. They prefer ’em 
mostly.” 

The petition, however, was elaborately drawn up, 
with a glowing description of Napoleon and the 
adjacent country, and a statement of the absolute 
necessity to the prosperity of that region and of 
one of the stations on the great through route to the 
Pacific, of the immediate improvement of Columbus 
River; to this was appended a map of the city and 
a survey of the river. It was signed by all the 
people at Stone’s Landing who could write their 
names, by Col. Beriah Sellers, and the Colonel 
agreed to have the names headed by all the Senators 

189 


MARK TWAIN 


and Representatives from the state and by a sprink- 
ling of ex-governors and ex-members of Congress. 
When completed it was a formidable document. Its 
preparation and that of more minute plots of the 
new city consumed the valuable time of Sellers and 
Harry for many weeks, and served to keep them 
both in the highest spirits. 

In the eyes of Washington Hawkins, Harry was 
@ superior being, a man who was able to bring things 
to pass in a way that excited his enthusiasm. He 
never tired of listening to his stories of what he had 
done and of what he was going to do. As for 
Washington, Harry thought he was a man of ability 
and comprehension, but ‘‘too visionary,’ he told 
the Colonel. The Colonel said he might be right, 
but he had never noticed anything visionary about 
him. 

‘‘He’s got his plans, sir. God bless my soul, at 
his age I was full of plans. But experience sobers 
a man. I never touch anything now that hasn’t 
been weighed in my judgment; and when Beriah 
Sellers puts his judgment on a thing, there it is.” 

Whatever might have been Harry’s intentions 
with regard to Laura, he saw more and more of her 
every day, until he got to be restless and nervous 
when he was not with her. That consummate artist 
in passion allowed him to believe that the fascina- 
tion was mainly on his side, and so worked upon his 
vanity, while inflaming his ardor, that he scarcely 
knew what he was about. Her coolness and coyness 
were even made to appear the simple precautions of 
a modest timidity, and attracted him even more 

190 


THE GILDED AGE 


than the little tendernesses into which she was 
occasionally surprised. He could never be away 
from her long, day or evening; and in a short time 
their intimacy was the town talk. She played with 
him so adroitly that Harry thought she was absorbed 
in love for him, and yet he was amazed that he did 
not get on faster in his conquest. 

And when he thought of it, he was piqued as 
well. A country girl, poor enough, that was evi- 
dent; living with her family in a cheap and most 
unattractive frame house, such as carpenters build 
in America, scantily furnished and unadorned; with- 
out the adventitious aids of dress or jewels or the 
fine manners of society—Harry couldn’t under- 
stand it. But she fascinated him, and held him 
just beyond the line of absolute familiarity at the 
same time. While he was with her she made him 
forget that the Hawkins house was nothing but a 
wooden tenement, with four small square rooms on 
the ground floor and a half story; it might have been 
a palace for aught he knew. 

Perhaps Laura was older than Harry. She was, 
at any rate, at that ripe age when beauty in woman 
seems more solid than in the budding period of girl- 
hood, and she had come to understand her powers 
perfectly, and to know exactly how much of the 
susceptibility and archness of the girl it was profit- 
able to retain. She saw that many women, with the 
best intentions, make the mistake of carrying too 
much girlishness into womanhood. Such a woman 
would have attracted Harry at any time, but only a 
woman with a cool brain and exquisite art could 

IQl 


MARK TWAIN 


have made him lose his head in this way; for Harry 
thought himself a man of the world. The young 
fellow never dreamed that he was merely being 
experimented on; he was to her a man of another 
society and another culture, different from that she 
had any knowledge of except in books, and she was 
not unwilling to try on him the fascinations of her 
mind and person. 

For Laura had her dreams. She detested the 
narrow limits in which her lot was cast, she hated 
poverty. Much of her reading had been of modern 
works of fiction, written by her own sex, which had 
revealed to her something of her own powers and 
given her, indeed, an exaggerated notion of the 
influence, the wealth, the position a woman may 
attain who has beauty and talent and ambition and 
a little culture, and is not too scrupulous in the 
use of them. She wanted to be rich, she wanted 
luxury, she wanted men at her feet, her slaves, and 
she had not—thanks to some of the novels she had 
read—the nicest discrimination between notoriety 
and reputation; perhaps she did not know how fatal 
notoriety usually is to the bloom of womanhood. 

With the other Hawkins children Laura had been 
brought up in the belief that they had inherited a 
fortune in the Tennessee Lands. She did not by any 
means share all the delusion of the family; but her 
brain was not seldom busy with schemes about it. 
Washington seemed to her only to dream of it and 
to be willing to wait for its riches to fall upon him 
in a golden shower; but she was impatient, and 
wished she were a man to take hold of the business. 

192 


THE GILDED AGE 


“You men must enjoy your schemes and your 
activity and liberty to go about the world,’”’ she said 
to Harry one day, when he had been talking of 
New York and Washington and his incessant engage- 
ments. 

“Oh, yes,” replied that martyr to business, ‘‘it’s 
all well enough, if you don’t have too much of it, 
but it only has one object.” 

“What is that?”’ 

“Tf a woman doesn’t know, it’s useless to tell 
her. What do you suppose I am staying in Hawk- 
eye for week after week, when I ought to be with 
my corps?” 

“‘I suppose it’s your business with Colonel Sellers 
about Napoleon; you’ve always told me so,” an- 
swered Laura, with a look intended to contradict 
her words. 

“And now I tell you that is all arranged, I sup- 
pose you'll tell me I ought to go?” 

“Harry! exclaimed Laura, touching his arm 
and letting her pretty hand rest there a moment. 
“Why should I want you to go away? The only 
person in Hawkeye who understands me.”’ 

“But you refuse to understand me,” replied 
Harry, flattered but still petulant. ‘‘You are like 
an iceberg, when we are alone.” 

Laura looked up with wonder in her great eyes, 
and something like a blush suffusing her face, fol- 
lowed by a look of languor that penetrated Harry’s 
heart as if it had been longing. ‘‘Did I ever show 
any want of confidence in you, Harry?’ And she 
gave him her hand, which Harry pressed with effu- 

193 


MARK TWAIN 


sion—something in her manner told him that he 
must be content with that favor. 

It was always so. She excited his hopes and 
denied him, inflamed his passion and restrained it, 
and wound him in her toils day by day. To what 
purpose? It was keen delight to Laura to prove 
that she had power over men. 

Laura liked to hear about life at the East, and- 
especially about the luxurious society in which Mr. 
Brierly moved when he was at home. It pleased 
her imagination to fancy herself a queen in it. 

‘“You should be a winter in Washington,” Harry 
said. 

‘‘But I have no acquaintances there.’’ 

‘‘Don’t know any of the families of the Congress- 
men? They like to have a pretty woman staying 
with them.” 

‘Not one.”’ 

‘‘Suppose Colonel Sellers should have business 
there; say, about this Columbus River appro- 
priation?”’ 

‘Sellers!’ and Laura laughed. 

‘You needn’t laugh. Queerer things have hap- 
pened. Sellers knows everybody from Missouri, and 
from the West, too, for that matter. He’d in- 
troduce you to Washington life quick enough. It 
doesn’t need a crowbar to break your way into 
society there as it does in Philadelphia. It’s demo- 
cratic, Washington is. Money or beauty will open 
any door. If I were a handsome woman, I shouldn’t 
want any better place than the capital to pick up 
a prince or a fortune.’’ 

194 


THE GILDED AGE 


“Thank you,” replied Laura. ‘‘But I prefer the 
quiet of home, and the love of those I know’’; and 
her face wore a look of sweet contentment and un- 
worldliness that finished Mr. Harry Brierly for the 
day. 

Nevertheless, the hint that Harry had dropped fell 
upon good ground, and bore fruit an hundred-fold; 
it worked in her mind until she had built up a plan 
on it, and almost a career for herself. Why not, 
she said, why shouldn’t I do as other women have 
done? She took the first opportunity to see Colonel 
Sellers, and to sound him about the Washington 
visit. How was he getting on with his navigation 
scheme, would it be likely to take him from home to 
Jefferson City, or to Washington, perhaps? 

‘Well, maybe. If the people of Napoleon want 
me to go to Washington, and look after that matter, 
I might tear myself from my home. It’s been sug- 
gested to me, but—not a word of it to Mrs. Sellers 
and the children. Maybe they wouldn’t like to 
think of their father in Washington. But Dilworthy, 
Senator Dilworthy, says to me, ‘Colonel, you are 
the man, you could influence more votes than any 
one else on such a measure, an old settler, a man of 
the people, you know the wants of Missouri; you’ve 
a respect for religion too,’ says he, ‘and know how 
the cause of the gospel goes with improvements.’ 
Which is true enough, Miss Laura, and hasn’t been 
enough thought of in connection with Napoleon. 
He’s an able man, Dilworthy, and a good man. A 
man has got to be good to succeed as he has. He’s 
only been in Congress a few years, and he must be 

195 


MARK TWAIN 


worth a million. First thing in the morning when 
he stayed with me he asked about family prayers, 
whether we had ’em before or after breakfast. I 
hated to disappoint the Senator, but I had to out 
with it, tell him we didn’t have ’em, not steady. 
He said he understood, business interruptions and 
all that, some men were well enough without, but as 
for him he never neglected the ordinances of re- 
ligion. He doubted if the Columbus River appro- 
priation would succeed if we did not invoke the 
Divine Blessing on it.” 

Perhaps it is unnecessary to say to the reader that 
Senator Dilworthy had not stayed with Colonel 
Sellers while he was in Hawkeye; this visit to his 
house being only one of the Colonel’s hallucinations— 
one of those instant creations of his fertile fancy, 
which were always flashing into his brain and out 
of his mouth in the course of any conversation and 
without interrupting the flow of it. 

During the summer Philip rode across the country 
and made a short visit in Hawkeye, giving Harry an 
opportunity to show him the progress that he and 
the Colonel had made in their operation at Stone’s 
Landing, to introduce him also to Laura, and to 
borrow a little money when he departed. Harry 
bragged about his conquest, as was his habit, and 
took Philip round to see his Western prize. 

Laura received Mr. Philip with a courtesy and a 
slight hauteur that rather surprised and not a little 
interested him. He saw at once that she was older 
than Harry, and soon made up his mind that she 
was leading his friend a country dance to which he 

196 


TRE GILDED AGE 


was unaccustomed. At least he thought he saw 
that, and half hinted as much to Harry, who 
flared up at once; but on a second visit Philip 
was not so sure—the young lady was certainly 
kind and friendly and almost confiding with 
Harry, and treated Philip with the greatest con- 
sideration. She deferred to his opinions, and 
listened attentively when he talked, and in time met 
his frank manner with an equal frankness, so that 
he was quite convinced that whatever she might feel 
toward Harry, she was sincere with him. Perhaps 
his manly way did win her liking. Perhaps in her 
mind, she compared him with Harry, and recognized 
in him a man to whom a woman might give her 
whole soul, recklessly and with little care if she lost 
it. Philip was not invincible to her beauty nor to 
the intellectual charm of her presence. 

The week seemed very short that he passed in 
Hawkeye, and when he bade Laura good-by, he 
seemed to have known her a year. 

‘“We shall see you again, Mr. Sterling,’’ she said 
as she gave him her hand, with just a shade of 
sadness in her handsome eyes. 

And when he turned away she followed him with 
a look that might have disturbed his serenity, if he 
had not at the moment had a little square letter in 
his breast pocket, dated at Philadelphia, and signed 
“Ruth.” 


CHAPTER XX 
DILWORTHY, THE GOLDEN-TONGUED STATESMAN 


—buaball Byonnslonaé go mHbaaiS qinnrcye] nunlabre 
Eejlle, ] cothaiple, 50 ccajdbnjS feynce ma Snes accap 
Ya zac aenac ap cfod— 


HE visit of Senator Abner Dilworthy was an 

event in Hawkeye. When a Senator, whose 
place is in Washington moving among the Great 
and guiding the destinies of the nation, condescends 
to mingle among the people and accept the hospi- 
talities of such a place as Hawkeye, the honor is 
not considered a light one. All parties are flattered 
by it, and politics are forgotten in the presence of 
one so distinguished among his fellows. 

senator Dilworthy, who was from a neighboring 
state, had been a Unionist in the darkest days of 
his country, and had thriven by it, but was that 
any reason why Colonel Sellers, who had been a 
Confederate and had not thriven by it, should give 
him the cold shoulder? 

The Senator was the guest of his old friend, Gen- 
eral Boswell, but it almost appeared that he was in- 
debted to Colonel Sellers for the unreserved hospital- 
ities of the town. It was the large-hearted Colonel 
who, in a manner, gave him the freedom of the city. 

198 


THE GILDED AGE 


“You are known here, sir,’”’ said the Colonel, 
‘“‘and Hawkeye is proud of you. You will find 
every door open, and a welcome at every hearth- 
stone. I should insist upon your going to my house, 
if you were not claimed by your older friend, Gen- 
eral Boswell. But you will mingle with our people, 
and you will see here developments that will sur- 
prise you.” 

The Colonel was so profuse in his hospitality that 
he must have made the impression upon himself that 
he had entertained the Senator at his own mansion 
during his stay; at any rate, he afterward always 
spoke of him as his guest, and not seldom referred 
to the Senator’s relish of certain viands on his table. 
He did, in fact, press him to dine upon the morning 
of the day the Senator was going away. 

Senator Dilworthy was large and portly, though 
not tall—a pleasant-spoken man, a popular man 
with the people. 

He took a lively interest in the town and all the 
surrounding country, and made many inquiries as to 
the progress of agriculture, of education, and of 
religion, and especially as to the condition of the 
emancipated race. 

‘“‘Providence,’’ he said, ‘‘has placed them in our 
hands, and although you and IJ, General, might have 
chosen a different destiny for them, under the Con- 
stitution, yet Providence knows best.”’ 

“You can’t do much with ’em,”’ interrupted 
Colonel Sellers. ‘‘They are a speculating race, 
sir, disinclined to work for white folks without 
security, planning how to live by only working for 

199 


MARK TWAIN 


themselves. Idle, sir, there’s my garden just a 
ruin of weeds. Nothing practical in ’em.”’ 

‘“There is some truth in your observation, Colo- 
nel, but you must educate them.” 

‘You educate the niggro and you make him more 
speculating than he was before. If he won’t stick 
to any industry except for himself now, what will 
he do then?”’ 

‘But, Colonel, the negro when educated will be 
more able to make his speculations fruitful.” 

‘‘Never, sir, never. He would only have a wider 
scope to injure himself. A niggro has no grasp, sir. 
Now, a white man can conceive great operations, 
and carry them out; a niggro can’t.” 

‘‘Still,’’ replied the Senator, “‘granting that he 
might injure himself in a worldly point of view, his 
elevation through education would multiply his 
chances for the hereafter—which is the important 
thing after all, Colonel. And no matter what the 
result is, we must fulfil our duty by this being.” 

‘“‘T’d elevate his soul,” promptly responded the 
Colonel; ‘‘that’s just it; you can’t make his soul too 
immortal, but I wouldn’t touch him, himself. Yes, 
sir! make his soul immortal, but don’t disturb the 
niggro as he is.”’ 

Of course one of the entertainments offered the 
Senator was a public reception, held in the court- 
house, at which he made a speech to his fellow- 
citizens. Colonel Sellers was master of ceremonies. 
He escorted the band from the city hotel to General 
Boswell’s; he marshaled the procession of Masons, 
of Odd Fellows, and of Firemen, the Good Tem- 


200 


THE GILDED AGE 


plars, the Sons of Temperance, the Cadets of Temper- 
ance, the Daughters of Rebecca, the Sunday-school 
children, and citizens generally, which followed the 
Senator to the court-house; he bustled about the 
room long after every one else was seated, and loudly 
cried ‘‘Order!’’ in the dead silence which preceded 
the introduction of the Senator by General Boswell. 
The occasion was one to call out his finest powers 
of personal appearaice, and one he long dwelt on 
with pleasure. 

This not being an edition of the Congressional 
Globe it is impossible to give Senator Dilworthy’s 
speech in full. He began somewhat as follows: 

‘'Fellow - citizens: It gives me great pleasure to 
thus meet and mingle with you, to lay aside for a 
moment the heavy duties of an official and burden- 
some station, and confer in familiar converse with 
my friends in your great state. The good opinion 
of my fellow-citizens of all sections is the sweetest 
solace in all my anxieties. I look forward with 
longing to the time when I can lay aside the cares 
of office—’’ [‘‘Dam sight,” shouted a tipsy fellow 
near the door. Cries of ‘‘Put him out.”’] 

‘“My friends, do not remove him. Let the mis- 
guided man stay. I see that he is a victim of that 
evil which is swallowing up public virtue and sap- 
ping the foundation of society. As I was saying, 
when I can lay down the cares of office and retire 
to the sweets of private life in some such sweet, 
peaceful, intelligent, wide-awake, and patriotic place 
as Hawkeye [applause]. I have traveled much, I 
have seen all parts of our glorious Union, but I 

201 


MARK TWAIN 


have never seen a lovelier village than yours, or one 
that has more signs of. commercial and industrial 
and religious prosperity—”’ [more applause]. 

The Senator then launched into a sketch of our 
great country, and dwelt for an hour or more upon 
its prosperity and the dangers which threatened it. 

He then touched reverently upon the institutions 
of religion, and upon the necessity of private purity, 
if we were to have any public morality. ‘‘I trust,” 
he said, ‘‘that there are children within the sound 
of my voice,”’ and after some remarks to them, the 
Senator closed with an apostrophe to ‘‘the genius 
of American Liberty, walking with the Sunday- 
school in one hand and Temperance in the other up 
the glorified steps of the National Capitol.” 

Colonel Sellers did not, of course, lose the oppor- 
tunity to impress upon so influential a person as the 
Senator the desirability of improving the navigation 
of Columbus River. He and Mr. Brierly took the 
Senator over to Napoleon and opened to him their 
plan. It was a plan that the Senator could under- 
stand without a great deal of explanation, for he 
seemed to be familiar with the like improvements 
elsewhere. When, however, they reached Stone’s 
Landing the Senator looked about him and in- 
quired : 

“Is this Napoleon?”’ 

‘‘This is the nucleus, the nucleus,’’ said the 
Colonel, unrolling his map. ‘‘Here is the deepo, the 
church, the City Hall, and so on.”’ 

‘“‘“Ah, I see. How far from here is Columbus 
River? Does that stream empty—” 

202 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘““That, why, that’s Goose Run. Thar ain’t no 
Columbus, thout’n it’s over to Hawkeye,” inter: 
rupted one of the citizens, who had come out to stare 
at the strangers. ‘‘A railroad come here last sum- 
mer, but it hain’t been here no mo’.”’ 

“Yes, sir,’ the Colonel hastened to explain, ‘‘in 
the old records Columbus River is called Goose 
Run. You see how it sweeps round the town— 
forty-nine miles to the Missouri; sloop navigation 
all the way, pretty much, drains this whole country; 
when it’s improved steamboats will run right up 
here. It’s got to be enlarged, deepened. You see 
by the map, Columbus River. This country must 
have water communication!” 

‘You'll want a considerable appropriation, Colonel 
Sellers.”’ 

‘I should say a million; is that your figure, Mr. 
Brierly ?”’ 

‘‘According to our surveys,’ said Harry, ‘‘a 
million would do it; a million spent on the river 
would make Napoleon worth two millions at least.’”’ 

**T see,’’ nodded the Senator. ‘“‘But you’d better 
begin by asking only for two or three hundred thou- 
sand, the usual way. You can begin to sell town 
lots on that appropriation, you know.”’ 

The Senator, himself, to do him justice, was not 
very much interested in the country or the stream, 
but he favored the appropriation, and he gave the 
Colonel and Mr. Brierly to understand that he would 
endeavor to get it through. Harry, who thought he 
was shrewd and understood Washington, suggested 
an interest. 

203 


MARK TWAIN 


But he saw that the Senator was wounded by the 
suggestion. 

‘You will offend me by repeating such an ob- 
servation,” he said. ‘‘Whatever I do will be for the 
public interest. It will require a portion of the ap- 
propriation for necessary expenses, and I am sorry 
to say that there are members who will have to be 
seen. But youcan reckon upon my humble services.”’ 

This aspect of the subject was not again alluded to. 
The Senator possessed himself of the facts, not from 
his observation of the ground, but from the lips of 
Colonel Sellers, and laid the appropriation scheme 
away among his other plans for benefiting the public. 

It was on this visit also that the Senator made 
the acquaintance of Mr. Washington Hawkins, and 
was greatly taken with his innocence, his guileless 
manner, and perhaps with his ready adaptability to 
enter upon any plan proposed. 

Colonel Sellers was pleased to see this interest that 
Washington had awakened, especially since it was 
likely to further his expectations with regard to the 
Tennessee Lands; the Senator having remarked to 
the Colonel, that he delighted to help any deserving 
young man, when the promotion of a private advan- 
tage could at the same time be made to contribute 
to the general good. And he did not doubt that 
this was an opportunity of that kind. . 

The result of several conferences with Washington 
was that the Senator proposed that he should go to 
Washington with him and become his private secre- 
tary and the secretary of his committee; a proposal 
which was eagerly accepted. 

204 


THE GILDED AGE 


The Senator spent Sunday in Hawkeye and at- 
tended church. He cheered the heart of the worthy 
and zealous minister by an expression of his sym- 
pathy in his labors, and by many inquiries in regard 
to the religious state of the region. It was not a 
very promising state, and the good man felt how 
much lighter his task would be, if he had the aid of 
such a man as Senator Dilworthy. 

‘‘T am glad to see, my dear sir,”’ said, the Senator, 
‘that you give them the doctrmes. Itis owing toa 
neglect of the doctrines, that there 1s such a fearful 
falling away inthecountry. Iwish that we mighthave 
you in Washington—as chaplain, now, in the Senate.” 

The good man could not but be a little flattered, 
and if sometimes, thereafter, in his discouraging 
work, he allowed the thought that he might perhaps 
be called to Washington as chaplain of the Senate, 
to cheer him, who can wonder. The Senator’s 
commendation at least did one service for him, it 
elevated him in the opinion of Hawkeye. 

Laura was at church alone that day, and Mr. 
Brierly walked home with her. A part of their way 
lay with that of General Boswell and Senator Dil- 
worthy, and introductions were made. Laura had 
her own reasons for wishing to know the Senator, 
and the Senator was not a man who could be called 
indifferent to charms such as hers. That meek young 
lady so commended herself to him in the short walk, 
that he announced his intentions of paying his 
respects to her the next day, an intention which 
Harry received glumly; and when the Senator was 
out of hearing he called him ‘‘an old fool.” 


205 


MARK TWAIN 


**Bie,”’ said Laura, ‘‘I'do:‘believe you are jealous, 
Harry. He is a very ‘pleasant man. He said you 
were a young man of great promise.”’ 

The Senator did call next day, and the result of 
his visit was that he was confirmed in his impression 
that there was something’ about him very attractive 
to ladies. He saw Laura again and again during 
his stay, and felt more and more the subtle influence 
of her feminine beauty, which every man felt who 
came near her. 

Harry was beside: himself with rage while the 
Senator remained in town; he declared that women 
were always ready. to drop any man for higher game; 
and he attributed his own ill luck to the Senator’s 
appearance.. The fellow was in fact crazy about her 
beauty and ready to beat his brains out in chagrin. 
Perhaps Laura enjoyed his torment, but she soothed 
him with blandishments that increased his ardor, and 
she smiled to herself to think that he had, with all 
his protestations of love, never spoken of marriage. 
Probably the vivacious fellow never had thought of 
it. At any rate, when he at length went away from 
Hawkeye he was no nearer it. But there was no 
telling to what desperate lengths his passion might 
not carry him. 

Laura bade him good-by with tender regret, 
which, however, did not disturb her peace or inter- 
fere with her plans. The visit of Senator Dilworthy 
had become of more importance to her, and it by 
and by bore the fruit she longed for, in an invitation 
to visit his family in the National Capital during the 
winter session of Congress. « 

206 


CHAPTER XXI 


RUTH AT A SEMINARY. NEW FRIENDSHIP AND 
PLEASURES | 
Unusquisque sua noverit ire via.— 
Propert. Eleg. ii. 25. 


O lift your natures up: 
Embrace our aims: work out your freedom. Girls, 
Knowledge is now no more:a fountain sealed; 
Drink deep until the habits of the slave, 
The sins of emptiness, gossip and spite 
And slander, die. The Princess. 


HETHER medicine is a science, or only an 

empirical method of getting a living out of 
the ignorance of the human race, Ruth found before 
her first term was over at the medical school that 
there were other things she needed to know quite as 
much as that which is taught in medical books, and 
that she could never satisfy her aspirations without 
more general culture. 

““Does your doctor know anything—I don’t 
mean about medicine, but about things in general, 
is he a man of information and good sense?’’ once 
asked an old practitioner. ‘If he doesn’t know 
anything but medicine the chance is he doesn’t 
know that.” 

The close application to her special study was 
beginning to tell upon Ruth’s delicate health also, 

207 


MARK TWAIN 


and the summer brought with it only weariness and 
indisposition for any mental effort. 

In this condition of mind and body the quiet of 
her home and the unexciting companionship of 
those about her were more than ever tiresome. 

She followed with more interest Philip’s sparkling 
account of his life in the West, and longed for his 
experiences, and to know some of those people of a 
world so different from hers, who alternately amused 
and displeased him. He at least was learning the 
world, the good and the bad of it, as must happen 
to every one who accomplishes anything in it. | 

But what, Ruth wrote, could a woman do, tied 
up by custom, and cast into particular circumstances 
out of which it was almost impossible to extricate 
herself? Philip thought that he would go some day 
and extricate Ruth, but he did not write that, for he 
had the instinct to know that this was not the 
extrication she dreamed of, and that she must find out 
by her own experience what her heart really wanted. 

Philip was not a philosopher, to be sure, but he 
had the old-fashioned notion, that whatever a 
woman’s theories of life might be, she would come 
round to matrimony, only give her time. He could 
indeed recall to mind one woman—and he never 
knew a nobler—whose whole soul was devoted and 
who believed that her life was consecrated to a 
certain benevolent project in singleness of life, who 
yielded to the touch of matrimony, as an icicle 
yields to a sunbeam. 

Neither at home nor elsewhere did Ruth utter 
any complaint, or admit any weariness or doubt of 

208 


THE GILDED AGE 


her ability to pursue the path she had marked out for 
herself. But her mother saw clearly enough her 
struggle with infirmity, and was not deceived by 
either her gaiety or by the cheerful composure which 
she carried into all the ordinary duties that fell to 
her. She saw plainly enough that Ruth needed an 
entire change of scene and of occupation, and per- 
haps she believed that such a change, with the 
knowledge of the world it would bring, would divert 
Ruth from a course for which she felt she was 
physically entirely unfitted. 

It therefore suited the wishes of all concerned, 
when autumn came, that Ruth should go away to 
school. She selected a large New England semi- 
nary, of which she had often heard Philip speak, 
which was attended by both sexes and offered almost 
collegiate advantages of education. hither she 
went in September, and began for the second time 
in the year a life new to her. 

The Seminary was the chief feature of Falllkill, a 
village of two to three thousand inhabitants. It 
was a prosperous school, with three hundred stu- 
dents, a large corps of teachers, men and women, 
and with a venerable rusty row of academic buildings 
on the shaded square of the town. The students 
lodged and boarded in private families in the place, 
and so it came about that while the school did a 
great deal to support the town, the town gave the 
students society and the sweet influences of home 
life. It is at least respectful to say that the influ- 
ences of home life are sweet. 

Ruth’s home, by the intervention of Philip, was 

209 


MARK TWAIN 


in a family—one of the rare exceptions in life or in 
fiction—that had never known better days. The 
Montagues, it is perhaps well to say, had intended 
to come over in the Mayflower, but were detained 
at Delft Haven by the illness of a child. They 
came over to Massachusetts Bay in another vessel, 
and thus escaped the onus of that brevet nobility 
under which the successors of the Mayflower Pil- 
grims have descended. Having no factitious weight 
of dignity to carry, the Montagues steadily improved 
their condition from the day they landed, and they 
were never more vigorous or prosperous than at the 
date of this narrative. With character compacted 
by the rigid Puritan discipline of more than two 
centuries, they had retained its strength and purity 
and thrown off its narrowness, and were now blos- 
soming under the generous modern influences. 
Squire Oliver Montague, a lawyer, who had retired 
from the practice of his profession except in rare 
cases, dwelt in a square old-fashioned New England 
mansion a quarter of a mile away from the green. 
It was called a mansion because it stood alone with 
ample fields about it, and had an avenue of trees 
leading to it from the road, and on the west com- 
manded a view of a pretty little lake with gentle 
slopes and nodding groves. But it was just a plain, 
roomy house, capable of extending to many guests 
an unpretending hospitality. 

The family consisted of the Squire and his wife, 
a son and a daughter married and not at home, a 
son in college at Cambridge, another son at the 
Seminary, and a daughter Alice, who was a year or 

210 


THE GILDED AGE 


more older than Ruth. Having only riches enough 
to be able to gratify reasonable desires, and yet 
make their gratifications always a novelty and a 
pleasure, the family occupied that just mean in life 
which is so rarely attained, and still more rarely 
enjoyed without discontent. 

If Ruth did not find so much luxury in the house 
as in her own home, there were evidences of culture, 
of intellectual activity and of a zest in the affairs of 
all the world, which greatly impressed her. Every 
room had its book-cases or book-shelves, and was 
more or less a library; upon every table was liable 
to be a litter of new books, fresh periodicals, and 
daily newspapers. There were plants in the sunny 
windows and some choice engravings on the walls, 
with bits of color in oil or water-colors; the piano 
was sure to be open and strewn with music; and 
there were photographs and little souvenirs here and 
there of foreign travel. An absence of any ‘‘what- 
nots’’ in the corners with rows of cheerful shells, 
and Hindu gods, and Chinese idols, and nests of 
useless boxes of lacquered wood, might be taken as 
denoting a languidness in the family concerning 
foreign missions, but perhaps unjustly. 

At any rate the life of the world flowed freely into 
this hospitable house, and there was always so much 
talk there of the news of the day, of the new books 
and of authors, of Boston radicalism and New York 
civilization, and the virtue of Congress, that small 
gossip stood a very poor chance. 

All this was in many ways so new to Ruth that 
she seemed to have passed into another world, in 

2k 


MARK TWAIN 


which she experienced a freedom and a mental 
exhilaration unknown to her before. Under this 
influence she entered upon her studies with keen 
enjoyment, finding for a time all the relaxation she 
needed, in the charming social life at the Montague 
house. 

It is strange, she wrote to Philip, in one of her 
occasional letters, that you never told me more about 
this delightful family, and scarcely mentioned Alice, 
who is the life of it, just the noblest girl, unselfish, 
knows how to do so many things, with lots of 
talent, with a dry humor, and an odd way of look- | 
ing at things, and yet quiet and even serious often— 
one of your ‘“‘capable’’ New England girls. We 
shall be great friends. It had never occurred to 
Philip that there was anything extraordinary about 
the family that needed mention. He knew dozens 
of girls like Alice, he thought to himself, but only 
one like Ruth. 

Good friends the two girls were from the begin- 
ning. Ruth was a study to Alice, the product 
of a culture entirely foreign to her experience, 
so much a child in some things, so much a woman 
in others; and Ruth in turn, it must be confessed, 
probing Alice sometimes with her serious gray eyes, 
wondered what her object in life was, and whether 
she had any purpose beyond living as she now saw 
her. For she could scarcely conceive of a life that 
should not be devoted to the accomplishment of 
some definite work, and she had no doubt that in 
her own case everything else would yield to the pro- 
fessional career she had marked out. 

212 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘So you know Philip Sterling,’’ said Ruth one 
day as the girls sat at their sewing. Ruth never 
embroidered, and never sewed when she could avoid 
it. Bless her! 

‘“‘Oh yes, we are old friends. Philip used to 
come to Fallkill often while he was in college. He 
was once rusticated here for a term.”’ 

‘““Rusticated ?” 

‘‘Suspended for some college scrape. He was a 
great favorite here. Father and he were famous 
friends. Father said that Philip had no end of non- 
sense in him and was always blundering into some- 
thing, but he was a royal good fellow and would. 
come out all right.” 

“Did you think he was fickle?”’ 

‘““Why, I never thought whether he was or not,” 
replied Alice, looking up. ‘‘I suppose he was al- 
ways in love with some girl or another, as college 
boys are. He used to make me his confidant now 
and then, and be terribly in the dumps.” 

‘““Why did he come to you?’ pursued Ruth; 
‘‘you were younger than he.”’ 

‘I’m sure I don’t know. He was at our house a 
good deal. Once at a picnic by the lake, at the 
risk of his own life, he saved sister Millie from 
drowning, and we all liked to have him here. Per- 
haps he thought as he had saved one sister, the 
other ought to help him when he was in trouble. I 
don’t know.”’ 

The fact was that Alice was a person who invited 
confidences, because she never betrayed them, and 
gave abundant sympathy in return. There are per- 

213 


MARK TWAIN 


sons, whom: we all know, to whom human confi- 
dences, troubles, and heartache flow as naturally as 
streams to a placid lake. 

This is not a history of Fallkill, nor of the Mon- 
tague family, worthy as both are of that honor, and 
this narrative cannot be diverted into long loitering 
with them. If the reader visits the village to-day, 
he will doubtless be pointed out the Montague dwell- 
ing, where Ruth lived, the cross-lot path she tra- 
versed to the Seminary, and the venerable chapel 
with its cracked bell. 

In the little society of the place, the Quaker girl 
was a favorite, and no considerable social gathering 
or pleasure party was thought complete without her. 
There was something in this seemingly transparent 
and yet deep character, in her childlike gaiety and 
enjoyment of the society about her, and in her not 
seldom absorption in herself, that would have made 
her long remembered there if no events had subse- 
quently occurred to recall her to mind. 

To the surprise of Alice, Ruth took to the small 
gaieties of the village with a zest of enjoyment that 
seemed foreign to one who had devoted her life to a 
serious profession from the highest motives. Alice 
liked society well enough, she thought, but there 
was nothing exciting in that of Fallkill, nor anything 
novel in the attentions of the well-bred young gentle- 
men one met in it. It must have worn a different 
aspect to Ruth, for she entered into its pleasures at 
first with curiosity, and then with interest, and finally 
with a kind of staid abandon that no one would have 
deemed possible for her. Parties, picnics, rowing- 

214 


THE GILDED AGE 


matches, moonlight strolls, nutting-expeditions in 
the October woods—Alice declared that it was a 
whirl of dissipation. The fondness of Ruth, which 
was scarcely disguised, for the company of agreeable 
young fellows, who talked nothings, gave Alice op- 
portunity for no end of banter. 

‘Do you look upon them as ‘subjects,’ dear?’ 
she would ask. 

And Ruth laughed her merriest laugh, and then 
looked sober again. Perhaps she was thinking, 
after all, whether she knew herself. 

If you should rear a duck in the heart of the 
Sahara, no doubt it would swim if you brought it to 
the Nile. 

Surely no one would have predicted when Ruth 
left Philadelphia that she would become absorbed to 
this extent, and so happy, in a life so unlike that 
she thought she desired. But no one can tell how 
a woman will act under any circumstances. The 
reason novelists nearly always fail in depicting 
women when they make them act, is that they let 
them do what they have observed some woman has 
done at some time or another. And that is where 
they make a mistake; for a woman will never do 
again what has been done before. It is this uncer- 
tainty that causes women, considered as materials for 
fiction, to be so interesting to themselves and to others. 

As the fall went on and the winter, Ruth did not 
distinguish herself greatly at the Fallkill Seminary 
as a student, a fact that apparently gave her no 
anxiety, and did not diminish her enjoyment of a 
new sort of power which had awakened within her. 

215 


CHAPTER XXII 


PHILIP AT FALLKILL, IN LOVE. HARRY SPREADS 
HIMSELF 


Wohl giebt es im Leben kein stisseres Gliick, 
Als der Liebe Gestandniss im Liebchen’s Blick; 
Wohl giebt es im Leben nicht hoher Lust, 
Als Freuden der Liebe an liebender Brust. 
Dem hat nie das Leben freundlich begegnet, 
Den nicht die Weihe der Liebe gesegnet. 
Doch der Liebe Glick, so himmlisch, so schén 


Kann nie ohne Glauben an Tugend bestehn. 
Korner. 


O ke aloha ka mea i oi aku ka maikai mamua o ka umeki poi 
a me ka ipukaia. 


N midwinter, an event occurred of unusual inter- 

est to the inhabitants of the Montague house, and 
to the friends of the young ladies who sought their 
society. 

This was the arrival at the Sassacus Hotel of two 
young gentlemen from the West. 

It is the fashion in New England to give Indian 
names to the public houses, not that the late la- 
mented savage knew how to keep a hotel, but that 
his warlike name may impress the traveler who 
humbly craves shelter there, and make him grateful 
to the noble and gentlemanly clerk if he is allowed 
to depart with his scalp safe. 

216 


THe GILDED AGE 


The two young gentlemen were neither students 
for the Fallkill Seminary, nor lecturers on physi- 
ology, nor yet life-assurance solicitors, three suppo- 
sitions that almost exhausted the guessing power of 
the people at the hotel in respect to the names of 
‘Philip Sterling and Henry Brierly, Missouri,’’ on 
the register. They were handsome enough fellows, 
that was evident, browned by outdoor exposure, 
and with a free and lordly way about them that 
almost awed the hotel clerk himself. Indeed, he 
very soon set down Mr. Brierly as a gentleman of 
large fortune, with enormous interests on his shoul- 
ders. Harry had a way of casually mentioning 
Western investments, through lines, the freighting 
business, and the route through the Indian terri- 
tory to Lower California, which was calculated to 
give an importance to his lightest word. 

‘You've a pleasant town here, sir, and the most 
comfortable - looking hotel I’ve seen out of New 
York,” said Harry to the clerk; “‘we shall stay 
here a few days if you can give us a roomy suite of 
apartments.”’ 

Harry usually had the best of everything, wher- 
ever he went, as such fellows always do have in this 
accommodating world. Philip would have been 
quite content with less expensive quarters, but 
there was no resisting Harry’s generosity in such 
matters. 

Railroad surveying and real-estate operations were 
at a standstill during the winter in Missouri, and 
the young men had taken advantage of the lull to 
come East, Philip to see if there was any disposition 

217 


MARK TWAIN 


in his friends, the railway contractors, to give him 
a share in the Salt Lick Union Pacific Extension, and 
Harry to open out to his uncle the prospects of the 
new city at Stone’s Landing, and to procure con- 
gressional appropriations for the harbor and for 
making Goose Run navigable. Harry had with him 
a map of that noble stream and of the harbor, with 
a perfect network of railroads centering in it, pictures 
of wharves, crowded with steamboats, and of huge 
grain-elevators on the bank, all of which grew out 
of the combined imaginations of Colonel Sellers and 
Mr. Brierly. The Colonel had entire confidence in 
Harry’s influence with Wall Street, and with Con- 
gressmen, to bring about the consummation of their 
scheme, and he waited his return in the empty house 
at Hawkeye, feeding his pinched family upon the 
most gorgeous expectations with a reckless prodi- 
gality. 

‘Don’t let ’em into the thing more than is neces- 
sary,’ says the Colonel to Harry; ‘“‘give ’em a small 
interest; a lot apiece in the suburbs of the Landing 
ought to do a Congressman, but I reckon you'll have 
to mortgage a part of the city itself to the brokers.”’ 

Harry did not find that eagerness to lend money 
on Stone’s Landing in Wall Street which Colonel 
Sellers had expected (it had seen too many such 
maps as he exhibited), although his uncle and some 
of the brokers looked with more favor on the appro- 
priation for improving the navigation of Columbus 
River, and were not disinclined to form a company 
for that purpose. An appropriation was a tangible 
thing, if you could get hold of it, and it made little 


218 


THe GiLDS@D AGE 


difference what it was appropriated for, so long as 
you got hold of it. 

Pending these weighty negotiations, Philip has 
persuaded Harry to take a little run up to Fallkill, 
a not difficult task, for that young man would at 
any time have turned his back upon all the land in 
the West at sight of a new and pretty face, and he 
had, it must be confessed, a facility in love-making 
which made it not at all an interference with the 
more serious business of life. He could not, to be 
sure, conceive how Philip could be interested in a 
young lady who was studying medicine, but he had 
no objection to going, for he did not doubt that 
there were other girls in Fallkill who were worth a 
week’s attention. 

The young men were received at the house of the 
Montagues with the hospitality which never failed 
there. 

‘We are glad to see you again,’’ exclaimed the 
squire heartily; ‘‘you are welcome, Mr. Brierly, 
any friend of Phil’s is welcome at our house.’ 

“It’s more like home to me than any place 
except my own home,”’’ cried Philip, as he looked 
about the cheerful house and went through a general 
hand-shaking. 

“It’s a long time, though, since you have been 
here to say so,’’ Alice said, with her father’s frank- 
ness of manner; ‘‘and I suspect we owe the visit now 
to your sudden interest in the Fallkill Seminary.”’ 

Philip’s color came, as it had an awkward way of 
doing in his telltale face; but before he could 
stammer a reply, Harry came in with— 

219 


? 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“That accounts for Phil’s wish to build a semi- 
nary at Stone’s Landing, our place in Missouri, 
when Colonel Sellers insisted it should be a uni- 
versity. Phil appears to have a weakness for semi- 
naries.”’ 

‘It would have been better for your friend Sel- 
lers,’’ retorted Philip, “‘if he had had a weakness 
for district schools. Colonel Sellers, Miss Alice, is 
a great friend of Harry’s who is always trying to 
build a house by beginning at the top.” 

‘‘T suppose it’s as easy to build a university on 
paper as a seminary, and it looks better,” was 
Harry’s reflection; at which the Squire laughed, and 
said he quite agreed with him. The old gentleman 
understood Stone’s Landing a good deal better than 
he would have done after an hour’s talk with either 
of its expectant proprietors. 

At this moment, and while Philip was trying to 
frame a question that he found it exceedingly diffi- 
cult to put into words, the door opened quietly, and 
Ruth entered. Taking in the group with a quick 
glance, her eye lighted up, and with a merry smile 
she advanced and shook hands with Philip. She 
was so unconstrained and sincerely cordial, that it 
made that hero of the West feel somehow young 
and very ill at ease. 

For months and months he had thought of this 
meeting and pictured it to himself a hundred times, 
but he had never imagined it would be like this. 
He should meet Ruth unexpectedly, as she was 
walking alone from the school, perhaps, or entering 
the room where he was waiting for her, and she 

220 


THE GILDED AGE 


would cry ‘‘Oh, Phil,” and then check herself, and 
perhaps blush, and Philip, calm but eager and en- 
thusiastic, would reassure her by his warm manner, 
and he would take her hand impressively, and she 
would look up timidly, and, after his long absence, 
perhaps he would be permitted to Good 
heavens! how many times he had come to his point, 
and wondered if it could happen so. Well, well; 
he had never supposed that he should be the one 
embarrassed, and above all by a sincere and cordial 
welcome. 

‘““We heard you were at the Sassacus House,’ 
were Ruth’s first words; ‘‘and this, I suppose, is 
your friend?”’ 

‘“‘I beg your pardon,” Philip at length blundered 
out, ‘‘this is Mr. Brierly of whom I have written 
you.”’ 

And Ruth welcomed Harry with a friendliness 
that Philip thought was due to his friend, to be sure, 
but which seemed to him too level with her recep- 
tion of himself, but which Harry received as his 
due from the other sex. 

Questions were asked about the journey and 
about the West, and the conversation became a 
general one, until Philip at length found himself 
talking with the Squire in relation to land and rail- 
roads and things he couldn’t keep his mind on; 
especially as he heard Ruth and Harry in an ani- 
mated discourse, and caught the words ‘‘ New York,”’ 
and ‘‘opera,’’ and ‘‘reception,’’ and knew that 
Harry was giving his imagination full range in the 
world of fashion. 


221 


MARK TWAIN 


Harry knew all about the opera, green-room and 
all (at least he said so), and knew a good many of 
the operas, and could make very entertaining stories 
of their plots, telling how the soprano came in here, 
and the basso here, humming the beginning of their 
airs—tum-ti-tum-ti-ti—suggesting the profound dis- 
satisfaction of the basso recitative—down-among- 
the-dead-men—and touching off the whole with an 
airy grace quite captivating; though he couldn’t 
have sung a single air through to save himself, and 
he hadn’t an ear to know whether it was sung cor- 
rectly. All the same he doted on the opera, and 
kept a box there, into which he lounged occasionally 
to hear a favorite scene and meet his society friends. 
If Ruth was ever in the city he should be happy 
to place his box at the disposal of Ruth and her 
friends. Needless to say that she was delighted 
with the offer. 

When she told Philip of it, that discreet young 
fellow only smiled, and said that he hoped she 
would be fortunate enough to be in New York some 
evening when Harry had not already given the 
use of his private box to some other friend. 

The Squire pressed the visitors to let him send 
for their trunks, and urged them to stay at his house, 
and Alice joined in the invitation, but Philip had 
reasons for declining. They stayed to supper, how- 
ever, and in the evening Philip had a long talk apart 
with Ruth, a delightful hour to him, in which she 
spoke freely of herself as of old, of her studies at 
Philadelphia and of her plans, and she entered into 
his adventures and prospects in the West with a 

222 


THE GILDED AGE 


genuine and almost sisterly interest; an interest, 
however, which did not exactly satisfy Philip—it 
was too general and not personal enough to suit 
him. And with all her freedom in speaking of her 
own hopes, Philip could not detect any reference 
to himself in them; whereas, he never undertook any- 
thing that he did not think of Ruth in connection 
with it, he never made a plan that had not reference 
to her, and he never thought of anything as com- 
plete if she could not share it. Fortune, reputation 
—these had no value to him except in Ruth’s eyes, 
and there were times when it seemed to him that if 
Ruth was not on this earth, he should plunge off 
into some remote wilderness and live in a purpose- 
less seclusion. 

‘“‘T hoped,”’ said Philip, ‘‘to get a little start in 
connection with this new railroad, and make a little 
money, so that I could come East and engage in 
something more suited to my tastes. I shouldn't 
like to live in the West. Would you?” 

“Tt never occurred to me whether I would or 
not,’’ was the unembarrassed reply. ‘‘One of our 
graduates went to Chicago, and has a nice practice 
there. I don’t know where I shall go. It would 
mortify mother dreadfully to have me driving about 
Philadelphia in a doctor’s gig.”’ 

Philip laughed at the idea of it. ‘‘And does it 
seem as necessary to you to do it as it did before 
you came to Fallkill?”’ 

It was a home question, and went deeper than 
Philip knew, for Ruth at once thought of practising 
her profession among the young gentlemen and 

223 


MARK TWAIN 


ladies of her acquaintance in the village; but she was 
reluctant to admit to herself that her notions of a 
career had undergone any change. 

‘Oh, I don’t think I should come to Fallkill to 
practise, but I must do something when I am 
through school; and why not medicine?’’ 

Philip would have liked to explain why not, but 
the explanation would be of no use if it were not 
already obvious to Ruth. 

Harry was equally in his element whether in- 
structing Squire Montague about the investment of 
capital in Missouri, the improvement of Columbus 
River, the project he and some gentlemen in New 
York had for making a shorter Pacific connection 
with the Mississippi than the present one; or divert- 
ing Mrs. Montague with his experience in cooking in 
camp; or drawing for Miss Alice an amusing picture 
of the social contrasts of New England and the 
border where he had been. 

Harry was a very entertaining fellow, having his 
imagination to help his memory, and telling his 
stories as if he believed them—as perhaps he did. 
Alice was greatly amused with Harry, and listened 
so seriously to his romancing that he exceeded his 
usual limits. Chance allusions to his bachelor estab- 
lishment in town and the place of his family on 
the Hudson, could not have been made by a mil- 
lionaire more naturally. 

“IT should think,’’ queried Alice, ‘‘you would 
rather stay in New York than to try the rough life 
at the West you have been speaking of.” 

‘“‘Oh, adventure,” says Harry; ‘‘I get tired of 

224 


THE GILDED AGE 


New York. And besides I got involved in some 
operations that I had to see through. Parties in 
New York only last week wanted me to go down 
into Arizona in a big diamond interest. I told 
them, no, no speculation for me. I’ve got my 
interests in Missouri; and I wouldn’t leave Philip, 
as long as he stays there.” 

When the young gentlemen were on their way 
back to the hotel, Mr. Philip, who was not in very 
good humor, broke out: 

“What the deuce, Harry, did you go on in that 
style to the Montagues for?” 

“Go on?” cried Harry. ‘“‘Why shouldn’t I try 
to make a pleasant evening? And besides, ain’t I 
going to do those things? What difference does it 
make about the mood and tense of a mere verb? 
Didn’t uncle tell me only last Saturday, that I might 
as well go down to Arizona and hunt for diamonds? 
A fellow might as well make a good impression as 
a poor one.’’ 

‘“Nonsense. You'll get to believing your own 
romancing by and by.”’ 

“Well, you'll see. When Sellers and I get that 
appropriation, [ll show you an establishment in 
town and another on the Hudson and a box at the 
opera.” | 

“Yes, it will be like Colonel Sellers’s plantation at 
Hawkeye. Did you ever see that?” 

“Now, don’t be cross, Phil. She’s just superb, 
that little woman. You never told me.” 

‘“Who’s just superb?” growled Philip, fancying 
this turn of the conversation less than the other. 

225 


MARK TWAIN 


“Well, Mrs. Montague, if you must know.” 
And Harry stopped to light a cigar, and then puffed 
on in silence. 

The little quarrel didn’t last overnight, for Harry 
never appeared to cherish any ill will half a second, 
and Philip was too sensible to continue a row about 
nothing; and he had invited Harry to come with him. 

The young gentlemen stayed in Fallkill a week, 
and were every day at the Montagues, and took part 
in the winter gaieties of the village. There were 
parties here and there to which the friends of Ruth 
and the Montagues were, of course, invited, and 
Harry, in the generosity of his nature, gave in return 
a little supper at the hotel, very simple indeed, with 
dancing in the hall, and some refreshments passed 
round. And Philip found the whole thing in the 
bill when he came to pay it. 

Before the week was over Philip thought he had a 
new light on the character of Ruth. Her absorption 
in the small gaieties of the society there surprised 
him. He had few opportunities for serious conver- 
sation with her. ‘There was always some butterfly 
or another flitting about, and when Philip showed by 
his manner that he was not pleased, Ruth laughed 
merrily enough and rallied him on his soberness— 
she declared he was getting to be grim and unsocial. 
He talked, indeed, more with Alice than with Ruth, 
and scarcely concealed from her the troubie that 
was in his mind. It needed, in fact, no word from 
him, for she saw clearly enough what was going for- 
ward, and knew her sex well enough to know there 
was no remedy for it but time. 

226 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘Ruth is a dear girl, Philip, and has as much 
firmness of purpose as ever, but don’t you see she 
has just discovered that she is fond of society? 
Don’t you let her see you are selfish about it, is my 
advice.” 

The last evening they were to spend in Fallkill, 
they were at the Montagues’, and Philip hoped that 
he would find Ruth in a different mood. But she 
was never more gay, and there was a spice of mis- 
chief in her eye and in her laugh. ‘‘Confound it,” 
said Philip to himself, ‘‘she’s in a perfect twitter.”’ 
He would have liked to quarrel with her, and fling 
himself out of the house in tragedy style, going per- 
haps so far as to blindly wander off miles into the 
country and bathe his throbbing brow in the chilling 
rain of the stars, as people do in novels; but he had 
no opportunity. For Ruth was as serenely uncon- 
scious of mischief as women can be at times, and 
fascinated him more than ever with her little demure- 
nesses and half-confidences. She even said ‘‘thee”’ 
to him once in reproach for a cutting speech he 
began. And the sweet little word made his heart 
beat like a trip-hammer, for never in all her life had 
she said ‘‘thee’’ to him before. 

Was she fascinated with Harry’s careless bon- 
homie and gay assurance? Both chatted away in 
high spirits, and made the evening whirl along in 
the most mirthful manner. Ruth sang for Harry, 
and that young gentleman turned the leaves for her 
at the piano, and put in a bass note now and then 
where he thought it would tell. 

Yes, it was a merry evening, and Philip was 

227 


MARK TWAIN 


heartily glad when it was over, and the long leave- 
taking with the family was through with. 
‘‘Farewell, Philip. Good night, Mr. Brierly,” 
Ruth’s clear voice sounded after them as they went 
down the walk. 
And she spoke Harry’s name last, thought Philip. 


CHAPTER XXIII 
PHILIP AND HARRY GO TO WORK 


“‘O see ye not yon narrow road 
So thick beset wi’ thorns and briers? 
That is the Path of Righteousness, 
Though after it but few inquires. 


“And see ye not yon braid, braid road, 
That lies across the lily leven? 
That is the Path of Wickedness, 
Though some call it the road to Heaven.” 
Thomas the Rhymer. 


HILIP and Harry reached New York in very 

different states of mind. Harry was buoyant. 
He found a letter from Colonel Sellers urging him to 
go to Washington and confer with Senator Dil- 
worthy. The petition was in his hands. It had 
been signed by everybody of any importance in 
Missouri, and would be presented immediately. 

“T should go on myself,’’ wrote the Colonel, 
“but I am engaged in the invention of a process 
for lighting such a city as St. Louis by means of 
water; just attach my machine to the water-pipes 
anywhere and the decomposition of the fluid begins, 
and you will have floods of light for the mere cost 
of the machine. I’ve nearly got the lighting part, 
but I want to attach to it a heating, cooking, wash- 

229 


MARK TWAIN 


ing, and ironing apparatus. It’s going to be the 
great thing, but we'd better keep this appropriation 
going while I am perfecting it.” 

Harry took letters to several Congressmen from 
his uncle and from Mr. Duff Brown, each of whom 
had an extensive acquaintance in both Houses where 
they were well known as men engaged in large 
private operations for the public good, and men, 
besides, who, in the slang of the day, understood 
the virtues of ‘‘addition, division, and silence.” 

Senator Dilworthy introduced the petition into 
the Senate with the remark that he knew, personally, 
the signers of it, that they were men interested, it 
was true, in the improvement of the country, but he 
believed without any selfish motive, and that so far 
as he knew the signers were loyal. It pleased him 
to see upon the roll the names of many colored 
citizens, and it must rejoice every friend of humanity 
to know that this lately emancipated race were in- 
telligently taking part in the development of the 
resources of their native land. He moved the ref- 
erence of the petition to the proper committee. 

senator Dilworthy introduced his young friend to 
influential members, as a person who was very well 
informed about the Salt Lick Extension of the 
Pacific, and was one of the engineers who had made 
a careful survey of Columbus River; and left him 
to exhibit his maps and plans and to show the con- 
nection between the public treasury, the city of 
Napoleon, and legislation for the benefit of the whole 
country. 

Harry was the guest of Senator Dilworthy. 


230 


TmME GILDED" AGE 


There was scarcely any good movement in which the 
Senator was not interested. His house was open 
to all the laborers in the field of total abstinence, 
and much of his time was taken up in attending the 
meetings of this cause. He had a Bible class in the 
Sunday-school of the church which he attended, and 
he suggested to Harry that he might take a class 
during the time he remained in Washington; Mr. 
Washington Hawkins had a class. Harry asked the 
Senator if there was a class of young ladies for him 
to teach, and after that the Senator did not press 
the subject. 

Philip, if the truth must be told, was not well 
satisfied with his Western prospects, nor altogether 
with the people he had fallen in with. The railroad 
contractors held out large but rather indefinite 
promises. Opportunities for a fortune he did not 
doubt existed in Missouri, but for himself he saw no 
better means for livelihood than the mastery of the 
profession he had rather thoughtlessly entered upon. 
During the summer he had made considerable prac- 
tical advance in the science of engineering; he had 
been diligent, and made himself to a certain extent 
necessary to the work he was engaged on. The 
contractors called him into their consultations fre- 
quently, as to the character of the country he had 
been over, and the cost of constructing the road, 
the nature of the work, etc. 

Still Philip felt that if he was going to make either 
reputation or money as an engineer, he had a great 
deal of hard study before him, and it is to his credit 
that he did not shrink from it. While Harry was 


2g1 


MARK TWAIN 


in Washington dancing attendance upon the national 
Legislature and making the acquaintance of the vast 
lobby that encircled it, Philip devoted himself day 
and night, with an energy and a concentration he 
was capable of, to the learning and theory of his 
profession, and to the science of railroad-building. 
He wrote some papers at this time for The Plow, 
the Loom, and the Anvil, upon the strength of ma- 
terials, and especially upon bridge-building, which 
attracted considerable attention, and were copied 
into the English Practical Magazine. They served, 
at any rate, to raise Philip in the opinion of his 
friends, the contractors, for practical men have a 
certain superstitious estimation of ability with the 
pen, and though they may a little despise the talent, 
they are quite ready to make use of it. 

Philip sent copies of his performances to Ruth’s 
father and to other gentlemen whose good opinion 
he coveted, but he did not rest upon his laurels. 
Indeed, so diligently had he applied himself, that 
when it came time for him to return to the West, 
he felt himself, at least in theory, competent to take 
charge of a division in the field. 


CHAPTER XXIV 
THE CITY OF WASHINGTON 


Cante-teca. Japi-Waxte otonwe kin he cajeyatapi nawahon; 
otonwe wijice hinca keyapi se wacanmi. 

Toketu-kaxta. Han, hecetu; takuwicawaye wijicapi ota hen 
tipi. Mahp. Ekta Oicim. ya. 


HE capital of the Great Republic was a new 
world to country-bred Washington Hawkins. 
St. Louis was a greater city, but its floating popu- 
lation did not hail from great distances, and so it 
had the general family aspect of the permanent 
population; but Washington gathered its people 
from the four winds of heaven, and so the manners, 
the faces, and the fashions there presented a variety 
that was infinite. Washington had never been in 
‘‘society”’ in St. Louis, and he knew nothing of the 
ways of its wealthier citizens, and had never in- 
spected one of their dwellings. Consequently, every- 
thing in the nature of modern fashion and grandeur 
was a new and wonderful revelation to him. 
Washington is an interesting city to any of us. 
It seems to become more and more interesting the 
oftener we visit it. Perhaps the reader has never 
been there? Very well. You arrive either at night, 
rather too late to do anything or see anything until 
morning, or you arrive so early in the morning that 
233 


MARK TWAIN 


you consider it best to go to your hotel and sleep 
an hour or two while the sun bothers along over the 
Atlantic. You cannot well arrive at a pleasant 
intermediate hour because the railway corporation 
that keeps the keys of the only door that leads into 
the town or out of it takes care of that. You arrive 
in tolerably good spirits, because it is only thirty- 
eight miles from Baltimore to the capital, and so 
you have only been insulted three times (provided 
you are not in a sleeping-car—the average is higher, 
there): once when you renewed your ticket after 
stopping over in Baltimore, once when you were 
about to enter the “‘ladies’ car’? without knowing it 
was a lady’s car, and once when you asked the con- 
ductor at what hour you would reach Washington. 

You are assailed by a long rank of hackmen who 
shake their whips in your face as you step out upon 
the sidewalk; you enter what they regard as a 
‘‘carriage,” in the capital, and you wonder why 
they do not take it out of service and put it in the 
museum: we have few enough antiquities, and it is 
little to our credit that we make scarcely any effort 
to preserve the few we have. You reach your 
hotel, presently—and here let us draw the curtain 
of charity—because of course you have gone to 
the wrong one. You being a stranger, how could 
you do otherwise? There are a hundred and eigh- 
teen bad hotels, and only one good one. The most 
renowned and popular hotel of them all is perhaps 
the worst one known to history. 

It is winter, and night. When you arrived, it was 
snowing. When you reached the hotel, it was 

234 


Tne Cri LDEW AGE 


sleeting. When you went to bed, it was raining. 
During the night it froze hard, and the wind blew 
some chimneys down. When you got up in the 
morning, it was foggy. When you finished your 
breakfast at ten o’clock and went out, the sunshine 
was brilliant, the weather balmy and delicious, and 
the mud and slush deep and all-pervading. You will 
like the climate—when you get used to it. 

You naturally wish to view the city; so you take 
an umbrella, an overcoat, and a fan, and go forth. 
The prominent features you soon locate and get 
familiar with; first you glimpse the ornamental 
upper works of a long, snowy palace projecting 
above a grove of trees, and a tall, graceful white ~ 
dome with a statue on it surmounting the palace and 
pleasantly contrasting with the background of blue 
sky. That building is the Capitol; gossips will tell 
you that by the original estimates it was to cost 
$12,000,000, and that the government did come 
within $27,200,000 of building it for that sum. 

You stand at the back of the Capitol to treat 
yourself to a view, and it is a very noble one. You 
understand, the Capitol stands upon the verge of a 
high piece of table-land, a fine commanding position, 
and its front looks out over this noble situation for a 
city—but it don’t see it, for the reason that when 
the Capitol extension was decided upon, the property- 
owners at once advanced their prices to such in- 
human figures that the people went down and built 
the city in the muddy low marsh behind the temple 
of liberty; so now the lordly front of the building, 
with its imposing colonnades, its projecting, graceful 

235 


MARK TWAIN 


wings, its picturesque groups of statuary, and its 
long terraced ranges of steps, flowing down in white 
marble waves to the ground, merely looks out upon 
a sorrowful little desert of cheap boarding-houses. 

So you observe, that you take your view from the 
back of the Capitol. And yet not from the airy 
outlooks of the dome, by the way, because to get 
there you must pass through the great rotunda: and 
to do that, you would have to see the marvelous His- 
torical Paintings that hang there, and the bas-reliefs 
—and what have you done that you should suffer 
thus? And besides, you might have to pass through 
the old part of the building, and you could not help 
seeing Mr. Lincoln, as petrified by a young lady 
artist for ten thousand dollars—and you might take 
his marble emancipation proclamation, which he holds 
out in his hand and contemplates, for a folded nap- 
kin; and you might conceive from his expression and 
his attitude, that he is finding fault with the washing. 
Which is not the case. Nobody knows what zs the 
matter with him; but everybody feels for him. 
Well, you ought not to go into the dome anyhow, 
because it would be utterly impossible to go up 
there without seeing the frescoes in it—and why 
should you be interested in the delirium tremens of 
art? 

The Capitol is a very noble and a very beautiful 
building, both within and without, but you need not 
examine it now. Still, if you greatly prefer going 
into the dome, go. Now your general glance gives 
you picturesque stretches of gleaming water, on 
your left, with a sail here and there and a lunatic 

236 


THE GILDED AGE 


asylum on shore; over beyond the water, on a dis- 
tant elevation, you see a squat yellow temple which 
your eye dwells upon lovingly through a blur of 
unmanly moisture, for it recalls your lost boyhood 
and the Parthenons done in molasses candy which 
made it blest and beautiful. Still in the distance, 
but on this side of the water and close to its edge, 
the Monument to the Father of his Country towers 
out of the mud—sacred soil is the customary term. 
It has the aspect of a factory chimney with the top 
broken off. The skeleton of a decaying scaffolding 
lingers about its summit, and tradition says that the 
spirit of Washington often comes down and sits on 
those rafters to enjoy this tribute of respect which 
the nation has reared as the symbol of its unap- 
peasable gratitude. The Monument is to be finished, 
some day, and at that time our Washington will 
have risen still higher in the nation’s veneration, 
and will be known as the Great-Great-Grandfather of 
his Country. The memorial Chimney stands in a 
quiet pastoral locality that is full of reposeful ex- 
pression. With a glass you can see the cow-sheds 
about its base, and the contented sheep nibbling 
pebbles in the desert solitudes that surround it, and 
the tired pigs dozing in the holy calm of its protect- 
ing shadow. 

Now you wrench your gaze loose and you look 
down in front of you and see the broad Pennsylvania 
Avenue stretching straight ahead for a mile or more 
till it brings up against the iron fence in front of a 
pillared granite pile, the Treasury building—an 
edifice that would command respect in any capital. 

237 


MARK TWAIN 


The stores and hotels that wall in this broad avenue 
are mean, and cheap, and dingy, and are better left 
without comment. Beyond the Treasury is a fine 
large white barn, with wide unhandsome grounds 
about it. The President lives there. It is ugly 
enough outside, but that is nothing to what it is 
inside. Dreariness, flimsiness, bad taste reduced to 
mathematical completeness is what the inside offers 
to the eye, if it remains yet what it always has been. 

The front and right-hand views give you the city 
at large. It is a wide stretch of cheap little brick 
houses, with here and there a noble architectural 
pile lifting itself out of the midst—government 
buildings, these. If the thaw is still going on when 
you come down and go about town, you will won- 
der at the short-sightedness of the city fathers, 
when you come to inspect the streets, in that they 
do not dilute the mud a little more and use them for 
canals. 

If you inquire around a little, you will find that 
there are more boarding-houses to the square acre 
in Washington than there are in any other city in 
the land, perhaps. If you apply for a home in one 
of them, it will seem odd to you to have the land- 
lady inspect you with a severe eye and then ask you 
if you are a member of Congress. Perhaps, just as 
a pleasantry, you will say yes. And then she will 
tell you that she is ‘‘full.’”’ Then you show her her 
advertisement in the morning paper, and there she 
stands, convicted and ashamed. She will try to 
blush, and it will be only polite in you to take the 
effort for the deed. She shows you her rooms, 

238 


THE GILDED AGE 


now, and lets you take one—but she makes you pay 
in advance for it. That is what you will get for 
pretending to be a member of Congress. If you had 
been content to be merely a private citizen, your 
trunk would have been sufficient security for your 
board. If you are curious and inquire into this 
thing, the chances are that your landlady will be 
ill-natured enough to say that the person and prop- 
erty of a Congressman are exempt from arrest or 
detention, and that with the tears in her eyes she 
has seen several of the people’s representatives walk 
off to their several states and territories carrying her 
unreceipted board bills in their pockets for keepsakes. 
And before you have been in Washington many 
weeks you will be mean enough to believe her, too. 
Of course you contrive to see everything and find 
out everything. And one of the first and most start- 
ling things you find out is, that every individual you 
encounter in the city of Washington almost — and 
certainly every separate and distinct individual in the 
public employment, from the highest bureau chief, 
clear down to the maid who scrubs Department 
halls, the night watchmen of the public buildings, 
and the darky boy who purifies the Department 
spittoons— represents Political Influence. Unless 
you can get the ear of a Senator, or a Congress- 
man, or a Chief of a Bureau or Department, and 
persuade him to use his ‘‘influence”’ in your behalf, 
you cannot get an employment of the most trivial 
nature in Washington. Mere merit, fitness, and 
capability, are useless baggage to you without 
““influence.”” The population of Washington con- 
239 


MARK TWAIN 


sists pretty much entirely of government employees 
and the people who board them. There are thou- 
sands of these employees, and they have gathered 
there from every corner of the Union and got their 
berths through the intercession (command is nearer 
the word) of the Senators and Representatives of 
their respective states. It would be an odd circum- 
stance to see a girl get employment at three or four 
dollars a week in one of the great public cribs with- 
out any political grandee to back her, but merely 
because she was worthy, and competent, and a good 
citizen of a free country that “treats all persons 
alike.” Washington would be mildly thunderstruck 
at such a thing as that. If you are a member of 
Congress (no offense), and one of your constituents 
who doesn’t know anything, and does not want to 
go into the bother of learning something, and has 
no money, and no employment, and can’t earn a 
living, comes besieging you for help, do you say, 
‘“‘Come, my friend, if your services were valuable 
you could get employment elsewhere—don’t want 
you here’? Oh, no. You take him to a Depart- 
ment and say, ‘‘Here, give this person something to 
pass away the time at—and a salary ’’—and the thing 
is done. You throw him on his country. He is his 
country’s child, let his country support him. There 
is something good and motherly about Washington, 
the grand old benevolent National Asylum for the 
Helpless. 

The wages received by this great hive of em- 
ployees are placed at the liberal figure meet and just 
for skilled and competent labor. Such of them as 

240 


THE GILDED AGE 


are immediately employed about the two Houses of 
Congress are not only liberally paid also, but are 
remembered in the customary Extra Compensation 
bill which slides neatly through, annually, with the 
general grab that signalizes the last night of a 
session, and thus twenty per cent. is added to their 
wages, for—for fun, no doubt. 

Washington Hawkins’s new life was an unceasing 
delight to him. Senator Dilworthy lived sumptu- 
ously, and Washington’s quarters were charming— 
gas; running water, hot and cold; bathroom, coal- 
fires, rich carpets, beautiful pictures on the walls; 
books on religion, temperance, public charities, and 
financial schemes; trim colored servants, dainty 
food—everything a body could wish for. And as 
for stationery, there was no end to it; the govern- 
ment furnished it; postage-stamps were not needed 
—the Senator’s frank could convey a horse through 
the mails, if necessary. 

And then he saw such dazzling company. Re- 
nowned generals and admirals, who had seemed but 
colossal myths when he was in the Far West, went 
in and out before him or sat at the Senator’s table, 
solidified into palpable flesh and blood; famous 
statesmen crossed his path daily; that once rare and 
awe-inspiring being, a Congressman, was become a 
common spectacle—a spectacle so common, indeed, 
that he could contemplate it without excitement, 
even without embarrassment; foreign ministers were 
visible to the naked eye at happy intervals; he had 
looked upon the President himself, and lived. And 
more, this world of enchantment teemed with specu- 

241 


MARK TWAIN 


lation—the whole atmosphere was thick with it— 
and that, indeed, was Washington Hawkins’s native 
air; none other refreshed his lungs so gratefully. 
He had found paradise at last. 

The more he saw of his chief the Senator, the 
more he honored him, and the more conspicuously 
the moral grandeur of his character appeared to 
stand out. To possess the friendship and the kindly 
interest of such a man, Washington said in a letter 
to Louise, was a happy fortune for a young man whose 
career had been so impeded and so clouded as his. 

The weeks drifted by; Harry Brierly flirted, 
danced, added luster to the brilliant Senatorial re- 
ceptions, and diligently ‘““buzzed’”’ and ‘‘button- 
holed’’ Congressmen in the interest of the Columbus 
River scheme; meantime Senator Dilworthy labored 
hard in the same interest—and in others of equal 
national importance. Harry wrote frequently to 
Sellers, and always encouragingly; and from these 
letters it was easy to see that Harry was a pet with 
all Washington, and was likely to carry the thing 
through; that the assistance rendered him by “old 
Dilworthy’’ was pretty fair—pretty fair; ‘‘and 
every little helps, you know,” said Harry. 

Washington wrote Sellers officially, now and then. 
In one of his letters it appeared that whereas no 
member of the House committee favored the scheme 
at first, there was now needed but one more vote 
to compass a majority report. Closing sentence: 


Providence seems to further our efforts. 
(Signed) ABNER Ditwortuy, U.S. 6&., 
per WasHINGTON Hawkins, P. 5. 


242 


THE GILDEDr AGE 


At the end of a week, Washington was able to 
send the happy news— officially, as usual — that 
the needed vote had been added and the bill favor- 
ably reported from the committee. Other letters 
recorded its perils in committee of the whole, and 
by and by its victory, by just the skin of its teeth, 
on third reading and final passage. Then came 
letters telling of Mr. Dilworthy’s struggles with a 
stubborn majority in his own committee in the Sen- 
ate; of how these gentlemen succumbed, one by 
one, till a majority was secured. 

Then there was a hiatus. Washington watched 
every move on the board, and he was in a good 
position to do this, for he was clerk of this com- 
mittee, and also one other. He received no salary 
as private secretary, but these two clerkships, pro- 
cured by his benefactor, paid him an aggregate of 
twelve dollars a day, without counting the twen- 
ty per cent. extra compensation which would, of 
course, be voted to him on the last night of the 
session. 

He saw the bill go into committee of the whole 
and struggle for its life again, and finally worry 
through. In the fullness of time he noted its second 
reading, and by and by the day arrived when the 
grand ordeal came, and it was put upon its final 
passage. Washington listened with bated breath to 
the “‘Aye!” ‘‘No!” “No!” ‘Aye!’ of the voters, 
for a few dread minutes, and then could bear the 
suspense no longer. He ran down from the gallery 
and hurried home to wait. 

At the end of two or three hours the Senator 

243 


MARK TWAIN 


arrived in the bosom of his family, and dinner was 
waiting. Washington sprang forward, with the 
eager question on his lips, and the Senator said: 

‘‘We may rejoice freely, now, my son—Provi- 
dence has crowned our efforts with success.” 


CHAPTER XXV 


WORK AT NAPOLEON (STONE’S LANDING) 
Weebl elt ey qc 


ASHINGTON sent grand good news to 
Colonel Sellers that night. To Louise he 
wrote: 

“It is beautiful to hear him talk when his heart is 
full of thankfulness for some manifestation of the 
Divine favor. You shall know him, some day, my 
Louise, and knowing him you will honor him, as 
Tudos’’ 

Harry wrote: 

‘*T pulled it through, Colonel, but it was a tough 
job, there is no question about that. There was not 
a friend to the measure in the House committee 
when I began, and not a friend in the Senate com- 
mittee except old Dil himself, but they were all 
fixed for a majority report when I hauled off my 
forces. Everybody here says you can’t get a thing 
like this through Congress without buying com- 
mittees for straight-out cash on delivery, but I think 
I’ve taught them a thing or two—if I could only 
make them believe it. When I tell the old resident- 
ers that this thing went through without buying a 
vote or making a promise, they say, ‘That’s rather 

245 


MARK TWAIN 


too thin.’ And when I say, thin or not thin, it’s a 
fact, anyway, they say “Come, now, but do you 
really believe that?’ and when I say I don’t believe 
anything about it, I know it, they smile and say, 
‘Well, you are pretty innocent, or pretty blind, one 
or the other—there’s no getting around that.’ Why 
they really do believe that votes have been bought 
—they do, indeed. But let them keep on thinking 
so. I have found out that if a man knows how to 
talk to women, and has a little gift in the way of 
argument with men, he can afford to play for an 
appropriation against a money-bag and give the 
money-bag odds in the game. We've raked in two 
hundred thousand dollars of Uncle Sam’s money, 
say what they will—and there is more where this 
came from, when we want it, and I rather fancy I 
am the person that can go in and occupy it, too, if 
I do say it myself, that shouldn’t, perhaps. I'll be 
with you within a week. Scare up all the men you 
can, and put them to work at once. When I get 
there I propose to make things hum.” 

The great news lifted Sellers into the clouds. He 
went to work on the instant. He flew hither and 
thither making contracts, engaging men, and steep- 
ing his soul in the ecstasies of business. He was 
the happiest man in Missouri. And Louise was the 
happiest woman; for presently came a letter from 
Washington which said: 

‘*Rejoice with me, for the long agony is over! 
We have waited patiently and faithfully, all these 
years, and now at last the reward is at hand. A 
man is to pay our family forty thousand dollars for 

246 


THE GILDED AGE 


the Tennessee Land! It is but a little sum com- 
pared to what we could get by waiting, but I do 
so long to see the day when I can call you my own, 
that I have said to myself, better take this and en- 
joy life in a humble way than wear out our best days 
in this miserable separation. Besides, I can put this 
money into operations here that will increase it a 
hundredfold, yes, a thousandfold, in a few months. 
The air is full of such chances, and I know our fam- 
ily would consent in a moment that I should put in 
their shares with mine. Without a doubt we shall 
be worth half a million dollars in a year from this . 
time—TI put it at the very lowest figure, because it 
is always best to be on the safe side—half a million 
at the very lowest calculation, and then your father 
will give his consent and we can marry at last. Oh, 
that will be a glorious day. T al our friends the 
good news—I want all to share it.’ 

And she did tell her father and mother, but they 
said, let it be kept still for the present. The careful 
father also told her to write Washington and warn 
him not to speculate with the money, but to wait a 
little and advise with one or two wise old heads. 
She did this. And she managed to keep the good 
news to herself, though it would seem that the most 
careless observer might have seen by her springing 
step and her radiant countenance that some fine 
piece of good fortune had descended upon her. 

Harry joined the Colonel at Stone’s Landing, and 
that dead place sprang into sudden life. A swarm 
of men were hard at work, and the dull air was filled 
with the cheery music of labor. Harry had been 

247 


MARK TWAIN 


constituted engineer-in-general, and he threw the 
full strength of his powers into his work. He moved 
among his hirelings like a king. Authority seemed 
to invest him with a new splendor. Colonel Sellers, 
as general superintendent of a great public enter- 
prise, was all that a mere human being could be— 
and more. These two grandees went at their im- 
posing ‘“‘improvement’’ with the air of men who 
had been charged with the work of altering the 
foundations of the globe. 

They turned their first attention to straightening 
the river just above the Landing, where it made a 
deep bend, and where the maps and plans showed that 
the process of straightening would not only shorten 
distance but increase the ‘‘fall.’’ They started a 
cut-off canal across the peninsula formed by the 
bend, and such another tearing-up of the earth and 
slopping around in the mud as followed the order to 
the men had never been seen in that region before. 
There was such a panic among the turtles that at 
the end of six hours there was not one to be found 
within three miles of Stone’s Landing. They took 
the young and the aged, the decrepit and the sick 
upon their backs and left for tide-water in disorderly 
procession, the tadpoles following and the bullfrogs 
bringing up the rear. 

Saturday night came, but the men were obliged 
to wait, because the appropriation had not come. 
Harry said he had written to hurry up the money, 
and it would be along presently. So the work con- 
tinued, on Monday. Stone’s Landing was making 
quite a stir in the vicinity, by this time. Sellers 

248 


Vie GILDED AGE 


threw a lot or two on the market, ‘‘as a feeler,’’ and 
they sold well. He reclothed his family, laid in a 
good stock of provisions, and still had money left. 
He started a bank-account, in a small way — and 
mentioned the deposit casually to friends; and to 
strangers, too; to everybody, in fact; but not as 
a new thing—on the contrary, as a matter of life- 
long standing. He could not keep from buying 
trifles every day that were not wholly necessary, it 
was such a gaudy thing to get out his bank-book 
and draw a check, instead of using his old customary 
formula, ‘‘Charge it.’”’ Harry sold a lot or two, 
also—and had a dinner-party or two at Hawkeye 
and a general good time with the money. Both men 
held on pretty strenuously for the coming big prices, 
however. 

At the end of a month things were looking bad. 
Harry had besieged the New York headquarters of 
the Columbus River Slackwater Navigation Com- 
pany with demands, then commands, and finally 
appeals, but to no purpose; the appropriation did not 
come; the letters were not even answered. The 
workmen were clamorous, now. The Colonel and 
Harry retired to consult. 

‘“What’s to be done?”’ said the Colonel. 

‘‘Hane’d if I know.” 

‘Company say anything?” 

‘“Not a word.” 

‘“You telegraphed yesterday?” 

‘“Yes, and the day before, too.” 

‘‘No answer?” 

‘‘None—confound them!’’ 

249 


MARK TWAIN 


Then there was along pause. Finally both spoke 
at once. 

“Tve got it!” 

‘T’ve got it!” 

‘“What’s yours?” said Harry. 

‘Give the boys thirty-day orders on the company 
for the back pay.” 

‘“That’s it—that’s my own idea to a dot. But 
then—but then—”’ 

‘Yes, I know,” said the Colonel; ‘‘I know they 
can’t wait for the orders to go to New York and be 
cashed, but what’s the reason they can’t get them 
discounted in Hawkeye?” 

‘“Of course they can. That solves the difficulty. 
Everybody knows the appropriation’s been made 
and the company’s perfectly good.”’ 

So the orders were given and the men appeased, 
though they grumbled a little at first. The orders 
went well enough for groceries and such things at a 
fair discount, and the work danced along gaily for a 
time. Two or three purchasers put up frame houses 
at the Landing and moved in, and of course a far- 
sighted but easy-going journeyman printer wandered 
along and started the Napoleon Weekly Telegraph 
and Literary Repository—a paper with a Latin 
motto from the Unabridged Dictionary, and plenty 
of ‘‘fat’’ conversational tales and double-leaded 
poetry—all for two dollars a year, strictly in ad- 
vance. Of course the merchants forwarded the 
orders at once to New York—and never heard of 
them again. 

At the end of some weeks Harry’s orders were 

250 


THE GILDED AGE 


a drug in the market—nobody would take them at 
any discount whatever. The second month closed 
with a riot. Sellers was absent at the time, and 
Harry began an active absence himself with the mob 
at his heels. But being on horseback, he had the 
advantage. He did not tarry in Hawkeye, but went 
on, thus missing several appointments with creditors. 
He was far on his flight eastward, and well out of 
danger when the next morning dawned. He tele- 
graphed the Colonel to go down and quiet the 
laborers—he was bound East for money—everything 
would be right in a week—tell the men so—tell 
them to rely on him and not be afraid. 

Sellers found the mob quiet enough when he 
reached the Landing. They had gutted the Navi- 
gation office, then piled the beautiful engraved stock- 
books and things in the middle of the floor and 
enjoyed the bonfire while it lasted. They had a 
liking for the Colonel, but still they had some idea 
of hanging him, as a sort of makeshift that might 
answer, after a fashion, in place of more satisfactory 
game. 

But they made the mistake of waiting to hear 
what he had to say first. Within fifteen minutes his 
tongue had done its work and they were all rich 
men. He gave every one of them a lot in the sub- 
urbs of the city of Stone’s Landing, within a mile 
and a half of the future post-office and railway-sta- 
tion, and they promised to resume work as soon as 
Harry got East and started the money along. Now 
things were blooming and pleasant again, but the 
men had no money, and nothing to live on. The 

Dig 


MARK TWAIN 


Colonel divided with them the money he still had 
in bank—an act which had nothing surprising about 
it because he was generally ready to divide what- 
ever he had with anybody that wanted it, and it was 
owing to this very trait that his family spent their 
days in poverty and at times were pinched with 
famine. 

When the men’s minds had cooled and Sellers 
was gone, they hated themselves for letting him 
beguile them with fine speeches, but it was too late, 
now—they agreed to hang him another time—such 
time as Providence should appoint. 


CHAPTER XXVI 


MR. BOLTON MAKES ANOTHER VENTURE 
Herb ass gis OGéeSoxp 


UMORS of Ruth’s frivolity and worldliness at 

Fallkill traveled to Philadelphia in due time, 
and occasioned no little undertalk among the Bolton 
relatives. 

Hannah Shoecraft told another cousin that, for 
her part, she never believed that Ruth had so much 
more ‘‘mind”’ than other people; and Cousin Hulda 
added that she always thought Ruth was fond of 
admiration, and that was the reason she was un- 
willing to wear plain clothes and attend Meeting. 
The story that Ruth was ‘‘engaged” to a young 
gentleman of fortune in Fallkill came with the other 
news, and helped to give point to the little satirical 
remarks that went round about Ruth’s desire to be 
a doctor! 

Margaret Bolton was too wise to be either sur- 
prised or alarmed by these rumors. They might be 
true; she knew a woman’s nature too well to think 
them improbable, but she also knew how steadfast 
Ruth was in her purposes, and that, as a brook 
breaks into ripples and eddies and dances and sports 
by the way, and yet keeps on to the sea, it was 

253 


MARK TWAIN 


in Ruth’s nature to give back cheerful answer to 
the solicitations of friendliness and pleasure, to 
appear idly delaying even, and sporting in the sun- 
shine, while the current of her resolution flowed 
steadily on. 

That Ruth had this delight in the mere surface 
play of life—that she could, for instance, be inter- 
ested in that somewhat serious by-play called 
‘‘flirtation,’’ or take any delight in the exercise of 
those little arts of pleasing and winning which are 
none the less genuine and charming because they 
are not intellectual, Ruth, herself, had never sus- 
pected until she went to Fallkill. She had believed 
it her duty to subdue her gaiety of temperament, 
and let nothing divert her from what are called 
serious pursuits. In her limited experience she 
brought everything to the judgment of her own 
conscience, and settled the affairs of all the world in 
her own serene judgment hall. Perhaps her mother 
saw this, and saw also that there was nothing in the 
Friends’ society to prevent her from growing. more 
and more opinionated. 

When Ruth returned to Philadelphia, it must be 
confessed—though it would not have been by her 
—that a medical career did seem a little less neces- 
sary for her than formerly; and coming back in a 
glow of triumph, as it were, and in the consciousness 
of the freedom and life in a lively society and in 
new and sympathetic friendship, she anticipated 
pleasure in an attempt to break up the stiffness and 
levelness of the society at home, and infusing into 
it something of the motion and sparkle which were 

254 


Te GILDED AGE 


so agreeable at Fallkill. She expected visits from her 
new friends, she would have company, the new books 
and the periodicals about which all the world was 
talking, and, in short, she would have life. 

For a little while she lived in this atmosphere 
which she had brought with her. Her mother was 
delighted with this change in her, with the improve- 
ment in her health and the interest she exhibited in 
home affairs. Her father enjoyed the society of his 
favorite daughter as he did few things besides; he 
liked her mirthful and teasing ways, and not less a 
keen battle over something she had read. He had 
been a great reader all his life, and a remarkable 
memory had stored his mind with encyclopedic in- 
formation. It was one of Ruth’s delights to cram 
herself with some out-of-the-way subject and en- 
deavor to catch her father; but she almost always 
failed. Mr. Bolton liked company, a house full of 
it, and the mirth of young people, and he would 
have willingly entered into any revolutionary plans 
Ruth might have suggested in relation to Friends’ 
society. 

But custom and the fixed order are stronger than 
the most enthusiastic and rebellious young lady, as 
Ruth very soon found. In spite of all her brave 
efforts, her frequent correspondence, and her deter- 
mined animation, her books and her music, she 
found herself settling into the clutches of the old 
monotony, and as she realized the hopelessness of 
her endeavors, the medical scheme took new hold of 
her, and seemed to her the only method of escape. 

‘“Mother, thee does not know how different it is 

255 


MARK TWAIN 


in Fallkill, how much more interesting the people 
are one meets, how much more life there is.”’ 

“But thee will find the world, child, pretty much 
all the same, when thee knows it better. I thought 
once as thee does now, and had as little thought of 
being a Friend as thee has. Perhaps when thee 
has seen more, thee will better appreciate a quiet 
life.’’ 

“Thee married young. I shall not marry young, 
and perhaps not at all,” said Ruth, with a look of 
vast experience. 

‘““Perhaps thee doesn’t know thee own mind; I 
have known persons of thy age who did not. | Did 
thee see anybody whom thee would like to live with 
always in Fallkill?”’ 

““Not always,’’ replied Ruth with a little laugh. 
‘“Mother, I think I wouldn’t say ‘always’ to any 
one until I have a profession and am as independent 
as he is. Then my love will be a free act, and not 
in any way a necessity.” 

Margaret Bolton smiled at this new-fangled phil- 
osophy. ‘Thee will find that love, Ruth, is a thing 
thee won’t reason about, when it comes, nor make 
any bargains about. Thee wrote that Philip Sterling 
was at Fallkill.” 

‘Yes, and Henry Brierly, a friend of his; a very 
amusing young fellow and not so serious-minded as 
Philip, but a bit of a fop, maybe.”’ 

“‘And thee preferred the fop to the serious- 
minded ?”’ 

‘“‘T didn’t prefer anybody, but Henry Brierly was 
good company, which Philip wasn’t always.”’ 

256 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Did thee know thee father had been in cor- 
respondence with Philip?’ 

Ruth looked up surprised and with a plain ques- 
tion in her eyes. 

‘Oh, it’s not about thee.”’ 

‘‘What then?” and if there was any shade of dis- 
appointment in her tone, probably Ruth herself did 
not know it. 

‘“‘It’s about some land up in the country. That 
man Bigler has got father into another speculation.” 

“That odious man! Why will father have any- 
thing to do with him? Is it that railroad?”’ 

‘“Yes. Father advanced money and took land as 
security, and whatever has gone with the money 
and the bonds, he has on his hands a large tract of 
wild land.”’ 

‘‘And what has Philip to do with that?” 

‘“‘It has good timber, if it could ever be got out, 
and father says that there must be coal in it; it’s in 
a coal region. He wants Philip to survey it, and 
examine it for indications of coal.” 

“‘Tt’s another of father’s fortunes, I suppose,”’ 
said Ruth. ‘‘He has put away so many fortunes 
for us that I’m afraid we never shall find them.”’ 

Ruth was interested in it, nevertheless, and per- 
haps mainly because Philip was to be connected with 
the enterprise. Mr. Bigler came to dinner with her 
father next day, and talked a great deal about Mr. 
Bolton’s magnificent tract of land, extolled the 
sagacity that led him to secure such a property, and 
led the talk along to another railroad which would 
open a northern communication to this very land. 

257 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“Pennybacker says it’s full of coal, he’s no doubt 
of it, and a railroad to strike the Erie would make 
it a fortune.”’ 

‘Suppose you take the land and work the thing 
up, Mr. Bigler; you may have the tract for three 
dollars an acre.”’ 

‘You'd throw it away, then,” replied Mr. Bigler, 
‘fand I’m not the man to take advantage of a friend. 
But if you'll put a mortgage on it for the northern 
road, I wouldn’t mind taking an interest, if Penny- 
backer is willing; but Pennybacker, you know, don’t 
go much on land, he sticks to the legislature.”” And 
Mr. Bigler laughed. 

When Mr. Bigler had gone, Ruth asked her father 
about Philip’s connection with the land scheme. 

‘“There’s nothing definite,’ said Mr. Bolton. 
‘‘Philip is showing aptitude for his profession. I 
hear the best reports of him in New York, though 
those sharpers don’t intend to do anything but use 
him. I’ve written and offered him employment in 
surveying and examining the land. We want to 
know what it is. And if there is anything in it that 
his enterprise can dig out, he shall have an interest. 
I should be glad to give the young fellow a lift.” 

All his life Eli Bolton had been giving young fel- 
lows a lift, and shouldering the losses when things 
turned out unfortunately. His ledger, take it alto- 
gether, would not show a balance on the right side; 
but perhaps the losses on his books will turn out to 
be credits in a world where accounts are kept on a 
different basis. The left hand of the ledger will 
appear the right, looked at from the other side. 

258 


THE GILDED AGE 


Philip wrote to Ruth rather a comical account of 
the bursting up of the city of Napoleon and the 
navigation improvement scheme, of Harry’s flight 
and the Colonel’s discomfiture. Harry left in such 
a hurry that he hadn’t even time to bid Miss Laura 
Hawkins good-by, but he had no doubt that Harry 
would console himself with the next pretty face he 
saw—a remark which was thrown in for Ruth’s 
benefit. Colonel Sellers had in all probability, by 
this time, some other equally brilliant speculation 
in his brain. 

As to the railroad, Philip had made up his mind 
that it was merely kept on foot for speculative pur- 
poses in Wall Street, and he was about to quit it. 
Would Ruth be glad to hear, he wondered, that he 
was coming East? For he was coming, in spite of 
a letter from Harry in New York, advising him to 
hold on until he had made some arrangements in 
regard to contracts, he to be a little careful about 
Sellers, who was somewhat visionary, Harry said. 

The summer went on without much excitement 
for Ruth. She kept up a correspondence with Alice, 
who promised a visit in the fall, she read, she ear- 
nestly tried to interest herself in home affairs and 
such people as came to the house; but she found 
herself falling more and more into reveries, and 
growing weary of things as they were. She felt that 
everybody might become in time like two relatives 
from a Shaker establishment in Ohio, who visited 
the Boltons about this time, a father and son, clad 
exactly alike, and alike in manners. The son, how- 
ever, who was not of age, was more unworldly and 

259 


MARK TWAIN 


sanctimonious than his father; he always addressed 
his parent as ‘‘Brother Plum,’’ and bore himself 
altogether in such a superior manner that Ruth 
longed to put bent pins in his chair. Both father 
and son wore the long single-breasted collarless coats 
of their society, without buttons, before or behind, 
but with a row of hooks and eyes on either side in 
front. It was Ruth’s suggestion that the coats 
would be improved by a single hook and eye sewed 
on in the small of the back where the buttons usually 
are. 

Amusing as this Shaker caricature of the Friends 
was, it oppressed Ruth beyond measure, and in- 
creased her feeling of being stifled. 

It was a most unreasonable feeling. No home 
could be pleasanter than Ruth’s. The house, a 
little out of the city, was one of those elegant 
country residences which so much charm visitors to 
the suburbs of Philadelphia. A modern dwelling, 
and luxurious in everything that wealth could sug- 
gest for comfort, it stood in the midst of exquisitely 
kept lawns, with groups of trees, parterres of flowers 
massed in colors, with greenhouse, grapery, and 
garden; and on one side, the garden sloped away in 
undulations to a shallow brook that ran over a 
pebbly bottom and sang under forest trees. The 
country about was the perfection of cultivated land- 
scape, dotted with cottages, and stately mansions of 
Revolutionary date, and sweet as an English country- 
side, whether seen in the soft bloom of May or ir 
the mellow ripeness of late October. 

It needed only the peace of the mind within, to 

260 


THE GILDED AGE 


make it a paradise. One riding by on the Old 
Germantown road, and seeing a young girl swinging 
in the hammock on the piazza and intent upon 
some volume of old poetry or the latest novel, would 
no doubt have envied a life so idyllic. He could 
not have imagined that the young girl was reading 
a volume of reports of clinics and longing to be 
elsewhere. 

Ruth could not have been more discontented if 
all the wealth about her had been as unsubstantial 
as a dream. Perhaps she so thought it. 

“I feel,’’ she once said to her father, ‘‘as if I 
were living in a house of cards.”’ 

““And thee would like to turn it into a hospital?”’ 

““"No. But tell me, father,’’ continued Ruth, not 
to be put off, “‘is thee still going on with that Bigler 
and those other men who come here and entice 
thicer’’ 

Mr. Bolton smiled, as men do when they talk 
with women about ‘“‘business.”’ ‘‘Such men have 
their uses, Ruth. They keep the world active, and 
I owe a great many of my best operations to such 
men. Who knows, Ruth, but this new land pur- 
chase, which I confess I yielded a little too much 
to Bigler in, may not turn out a fortune for thee and 
the rest of the children?’ 

‘‘Ah, father, thee sees everything in a rose-colored 
light. I do believe thee wouldn’t have so readily 
allowed me to begin the study of medicine, if it 
hadn’t had the novelty of an experiment to thee.’ 

‘And is thee satisfied with it?” 

“If thee means, if I have had enough of it, no. 

261 


MARK TWAIN 


I just begin to see what I can do in it, and what a 
noble profession it is for a woman. Would thee 
have me sit here like a bird on a bough and wait for 
somebody to come and put me in a cage?” 

Mr. Bolton was not sorry to divert the talk from 
his own affairs, and he did not think it worth while 
to tell his family of a performance that very day 
which was entirely characteristic of him. 

Ruth might well say that she felt as if she were 
living in a house of cards, although the Bolton 
household had no idea of the number of perils that 
hovered over them, any more than thousands of 
families in America have of the business risks and 
contingencies upon which their prosperity and 
luxury hang. 

A sudden call upon Mr. Bolton for a large sum 
of money, which must be forthcoming at once, had 
found him in the midst of a dozen ventures, from 
no one of which a dollar could be realized. It was 
in vain that he applied to his business acquaintances 
and friends; it was a period of sudden panic and no 
money. ‘‘A hundred thousand! Mr. Bolton,”’ said 
Plumly. ‘‘Good God, if you should ask me for ten, 
I shouldn’t know where to get it.” 

And yet that day Mr. Small (Pennybacker, Bigler, 
and Small) came to Mr. Bolton with a piteous 
story of ruin in a coal operation, if he could not 
raise ten thousand dollars. Only ten, and he was 
sure of a fortune. Without it he was a beggar. 
Mr. Bolton had already Small’s notes for a large 
amount in his safe, labeled ‘‘doubtful’’; he had 
helped him again and again, and always with the 


262 


THE GILDED AGE 


same result. But Mr. Small spoke with a faltering 
voice of his family, his daughter in school, his wife 
ignorant of his calamity, and drew such a picture 
of their agony, that Mr. Bolton put by his own more 
pressing necessity, and devoted the day to scraping 
together, here and there, ten thousand dollars for 
this brazen beggar, who had never kept a promise 
to him nor paid a debt. 

Beautiful credit! The foundation of modern 
society. Who shall say that this is not the golden 
age of mutual trust, of unlimited reliance upon 
human promises? That is a peculiar condition of 
society which enables a whole nation to instantly 
recognize point and meaning in the familiar news- 
paper anecdote, which puts into the mouth of a 
distinguished speculator in lands and mines this 
remark: ‘‘I wasn’t worth a cent two years ago, and 
now I owe two millions of dollars.”’ 


CHAPTER XXVII 


COLONEL SELLERS IN DIFFICULTIES; BUT SEES A 
WAY OUT 


ow ab PE 


Gs oty ra rpaySivr EBrerev, rugrds yeySs, 
od phy ixixrnd? otdéiv, GAN’ svxapdiws 
Baroy tiv’ GdAnv Hrar’ sis dxavSivny, 
ndx’ rovd’ byéver’ éadSis éx rvddod Bréxav. 
Bishop Butler. In Arundines Cami. 


T was a hard blow to poor Sellers to see the work 

on his darling enterprise stop, and the noise and 
bustle and confusion that had been such refreshment 
to his soul, sicken and die out. It was hard to 
come down to humdrum ordinary life again after 
being a General Superintendent and the most con- 
spicuous man in the community. It was sad to see 
his name disappear from the newspapers; sadder 
still to see it resurrected at intervals, shorn of its 
aforetime gaudy gear of compliments and clothed 
on with rhetorical tar and feathers. 

But his friends suffered more on his account than 
he did. He was a cork that could not be kept 
under the water many moments at a time. 

He had to bolster up his wife’s spirits every now 
and then. On one of these occasions he said: 

264 


Mm GILDED AGE 


“It’s all right, my dear, all right; it will all come 
right in a little while. There’s two hundred thou- 
sand dollars coming, and that will set things boom- 
ing again. Harry seems to be having some difficul- 
ty, but that’s to be expected—you can’t move these 
big operations to the tune of Fisher’s Hornpipe, you 
know. But Harry will get it started along pres- 
ently, and then you'll see! I expect the news every 
day now.” 

“But Beriah, you've been expecting it every day, 
all along, haven’t you?” 

“Well, yes; yes—I don’t know but I have. But 
anyway, the longer it’s delayed, the nearer it grows 
to the time when it will start—same as every day 
you live brings you nearer to—nearer—”’ 

“The grave?” 

“Well, no—not that exactly; but you can’t 
understand these things, Polly dear—women haven’t 
much head for business, you know. You make 
yourself perfectly comfortable, old lady, and you’ll 
see how we'll trot this right along. Why, bless you, 
let the appropriation lag, if it wants to—that’s no 
great matter—there’s a bigger thing than that.” 

“Bigger than two hundred thousand dollars, 
Beriah ?”’ 

‘Bigger, child?—why, what’s two hundred thou- 
sand dollars? Pocket-money! Mere pocket-money! 
Look at the railroad! Did you forget the railroad? 
It ain’t many months till spring; it will be coming 
right along, and the railroad swimming right along 
behind it. Where’ll it be by the middle of summer? 
Just stop and fancy a moment—just think a little— 

265 


MARK TWAIN 


don’t anything suggest itself? Bless your heart, you 
dear women live right in the present all the time— 
but a man, why a man lives—’”’ 

‘“‘In the future, Beriah? But don’t we live in the 
future most too much, Beriah? We do somehow 
seem to manage to live on next year’s crop of corn 
and potatoes as a general thing while this year is 
still dragging along, but sometimes it’s not a robust 
diet—Beriah. But don’t look that way, dear— 
don’t mind what I say. I don’t mean to fret, I 
don’t mean to worry; and I don’t, once a month, do 
I, dear? But when I get a little low and feel bad, I 
get a bit troubled and worrisome, but it don’t mean 
anything in the world. It passes right away. I 
know you’re doing all you can, and I don’t want 
to seem repining and ungrateful—for I’m not, Beriah 
—you know I’m not, don’t you?” 

“Lord bless you, child, I know you are the very 
best little woman that ever lived—that ever lived 
on the whole face of the earth! And I know that I 
would be a dog not to work for you and think for 
you and scheme for you with all my might. And 
I'll bring things all right yet, honey—cheer up and 
don’t you fear. The railroad—” 

‘‘Oh, I had forgotten the railroad, dear, but 
when a body gets blue, a body forgets everything. 
Yes, the railroad—tell me about the railroad.” 

‘‘Aha, my girl, don’t you see? Things ain’t so 
dark, are they? Now J didn’t forget the railroad. 
Now just think for a moment—just figure up a little 
on the future dead moral certainties. For instance, 
call this waiter St. Louis. 

266 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘“‘And we'll lay this fork (representing the rail- 
road) from St. Louis to this potato, which is Slouch- 
burg: 

“Then with this carving-knife we’ll continue the 
railroad from Slouchburg to Doodleville, shown by 
the black pepper: 

““Then we run along the—yes—the comb—to 
the tumbler—that’s Brimstone: 

““Thence by the pipe to Belshazzar, which is the 
salt-cellar: 

“Thence to, to—that quill—Catfish—hand me 
the pincushion, Marie Antoinette: 

“Thence right along these shears to this horse, 
Babylon: 

“Then by the spoon to Bloody Run—thank you, 
the ink: 

“Thence to Hail Columbia—snuffers, Polly, please 
—move that cup and saucer close up, that’s Hail 
Columbia: 

*“Then—let me open my knife—to Hark-from-the- 
Tomb, where we'll put the candlestick—only a 
little distance from Hail Columbia to Hark-from-the- 
Tomb—down-grade all the way. 

*‘And there we strike Columbus River—pass me 
two or three skeins of thread to stand for the river; 
the sugar-bowl will do for Hawkeye, and the rat- 
trap for Stone’s Landing—Napoleon, I mean—and 
you can see how much better Napoleon is located 
than Hawkeye. Now here you are with your rail- 
road complete, and showing its continuation to 
Hallelujah, and thence to Corruptionville. 

‘‘Now, then—there you are! It’s a beautiful 

267 


MARK TWAIN 


road, beautiful. Jeff Thompson can out-engineer 
any civil engineer that ever sighted through an 
aneroid, or a theodolite, or whatever they call it—he 
calls it sometimes one and sometimes the other— 
just whichever levels off his sentence neatest, I 
reckon. But ain’t it a ripping road, though? I 
tell you, it Il make a stir when it gets along. Just 
see what a country it goes through. There’s your 
onions at Slouchburg—noblest onion country that 
graces God’s footstool; and there’s your turnip 
country all around Doodleville—bless my life, what 
fortunes are going to be made there when they get 
that contrivance perfected for extracting olive-oil 
out of turnips—if there’s any in them; and I reckon 
there is, because Congress has made an appropria- 
tion of money to test the thing, and they wouldn’t 
have done that just on conjecture, of course. And 
now we come to the Brimstone region—cattle raised 
there till you can’t rest—and corn, and all that sort 
of thing. Then you’ve got a little stretch along 
through Belshazzar that don’t produce anything now 
—at least nothing but rocks—but irrigation will 
fetch it. Then from Catfish to Babylon it’s a little 
swampy, but there’s dead loads of peat down under 
there somewhere. Next is the Bloody Run and Hail 
Columbia country—tobacco enough can be raised 
there to support two such railroads. Next is the 
sassparilla region. I reckon there’s enough of that 
truck along in there on the line of the pocket-knife, 
from Hail Columbia to Hark-from-the-Tomb, to fat 
up all the consumptives in all the hospitals from 
Halifax to the Holy Land. It just grows like weeds! 
268 


THE GILDED AGE 


I’ve got a little belt of sassparilla land in there just 
tucked away unobtrusively waiting for my little 
Universal Expectorant to get into shape in my head. 
And I'll fix that, you know. One of these days I'll 
have all the nations of the earth expecto—”’ 

‘But Beriah, dear—”’ 

‘Don’t interrupt me, Polly—I don’t want you to 
lose the run of the map—vwell, take your toy-horse, 
James Fitz-James, if you must have it—and run 
along with you. Here, now—the soap will do for 
Babylon. Let me see—where was I? Oh yes—now 
we run down to Stone’s Lan—Napoleon—now we 
run down to Napoleon. Beautiful road. Look at 
that, now. Perfectly straight line—straight as the 
way to the grave. And see where it leaves Hawkeye 
—clear out in the cold, my dear, clear out in the 
cold. That town’s as bound to die as—well if 
I owned it I’d get its obituary ready, now, and 
notify the mourners. Polly, mark my words—in 
three years from this, Hawkeye ‘Il be a howling 
wilderness. You'll see. And just look at that river 
—noblest stream that meanders over the thirsty 
earth!—calmest, gentlest artery that refreshes her 
weary bosom! Railroad goes all over it and all 
through it—wades right along on stilts. Seventeen 
bridges in three miles and a half—forty-nine bridges 
from Hark-from-the-Tomb to Stone’s Landing alto- 
gether—forty-nine bridges, and culverts enough to 
culvert creation itself! Hadn’t skeins of thread 
enough to represent them all—but you get an idea 
—perfect trestle-work of bridges for seventy-two 
miles. Jeff Thompson and I fixed all that, you 

269 


MARK TWAIN 


know; he’s to get the contracts and I’m to put them 
through on the divide. Just oceans of money in 
those bridges. It’s the only part of the railroad I’m 
interested in—down along the line—and it’s all I 
want, too. It’s enough, I should judge. Now here 
we are at Napoleon. Good enough country— 
plenty good enough—all it wants is population. 
That’s all right—that will come. And it’s no bad 
country now for calmness and solitude, I can tell 
you—though there’s no money in that, of course. 
No money, but a man wants rest, a man wants 
peace—a man don’t want to rip and tear around 
all the time. And here we go, now, just as straight 
as a string for Hallelujah—it’s a beautiful angle— 
handsome up-grade all the way—and then away 
you go to Corruptionville, the gaudiest country for 
early carrots and cauliflowers that ever—good 
missionary field, too. There ain’t such another 
missionary field outside the jungles of Central 
Africa. And patriotic?—why, they named it after 
Congress itself. Oh, I warn you, my dear, there’s 
a good time coming, and it Il be right along before 
you know what you’re about, too. That railroad’s 
fetching it. You see what it is as far as I’ve got, 
and if I had enough bottles and soap and bootjacks 
and such things to carry it along to where it joins 
onto the Union Pacific, fourtéen hundred miles from 
here, I should exhibit to you in that little internal 
improvement a spectacle of inconceivable sublimity. 
So, don’t you see? We've got the railroad to fall 
back on; and in the mean time, what are we worry- 
ing about that two-hundred-thousand-dollar appro- 
270 


tHe GILDED AGE 


priation for? That’s all right. I’d be willing to bet 
anything that the very next letter that comes from 
ary will—"’ 

The eldest boy entered just in the nick of time 
and brought a letter, warm from the post-office. 

“Things do look bright, after all, Beriah. I’m 
sorry I was blue, but it did seem as if everything 
had been going against us for whole ages. Open 
the letter—open it quick, and let’s know all about 
it before we stir out of our places. I am all ina 
fidget to know what it says.”’ 

The letter was opened, without any unnecessary 
delay. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


HOW APPROPRIATION BILLS ARE CARRIED 


Hvo der vil kjébe Pdlse af Hunden maa give ham Flesk igjen. 


—Mit seinem eignen Verstande wurde Thrasyllus schwerlich 
durchgekommen seyn. Aber in solchen Fallen finden seines- 
gleichen fiir ihr Geld immer einen Spitzbuben, der ihnen seinen 
Kopf leiht; und dann ist es so viel als ob sie selbst einen hatten. 

Wieland. Die Abderiten. 


HATEVER may have been the language of 

Harry’s letter to the Colonel, the informa- 
tion it conveyed was condensed or expanded, one or 
the other, from the following episode of his visit to 
New York: 

He called, with official importance in his mien, at 
No. — Wall Street, where a great gilt sign be- 
tokened the presence of the headquarters of the 
“Columbus River Slackwater Navigation Com- 
pany.’’ He entered and gave a dressy porter his 
card, and was requested to wait a moment in a sort 
of anteroom. ‘The porter returned in a minute, and 
asked whom he would like to see? 

‘“The president of the company, of course.”’ 

‘‘He is busy with some gentlemen, sir; says he 
will be done with them directly.”’ 

That a copper-plate card with ‘‘Engineer-in- 
Chief’? on it should be received with such tran- 

272 


THE GILDED AGE 


quillity as this, annoyed Mr. Brierly not a little. 
But he had to submit. Indeed, his annoyance had 
time to augment a good deal; for he was allowed to 
cool his heels a full half-hour in the anteroom be- 
fore those gentlemen emerged and he was ushered 
into the presence. He found a stately dignitary 
occupying a very official chair behind a long green 
morocco -covered table, in a room sumptuously 
carpeted and furnished, and well garnished with 
pictures. 

‘‘Good morning, sir; take a seat—take a seat.”’ 

“Thank you, sir,” said Harry, throwing as much 
chill nto his manner as his ruffled dignity prompted. 

‘““We perceive by your reports and the reports of 
the chief superintendent, that you have been making 
gratifying progress with the work. We are all very 
much pleased.’’ 

‘‘Indeed? We did not discover it from your 
letters—which we have not received; nor by the 
treatment our drafts have met with—which were 
not honored; nor by the reception of any part of 
the appropriation, no part of it having come to 
hand.”’ 

‘“Why, my dear Mr. Brierly, there must be some 
mistake. I am sure we wrote you and also Mr. 
Sellers, recently—when my clerk comes he will 
show copies—letters informing you of the ten per. 
cent. assessment.”’ 

“Oh, certainly, we got those letters. But what 
we wanted was money to carry on the work— 
money to pay the men.” 

“Certainly, certainly—true enough—but we cred- 

273 


MARK TWAIN 


ited you both for a large part of your assessments— 
I am sure that was in our letters.”’ 

“Of course that was in—I remember that.” 

‘Ah, very well, then. Now we begin to under- 
stand each other.”’ 

‘Well, I don’t see that we do. There’s two 
months’ wages due the men, and—”’ 

‘How? Haven’t you paid the men?” 

‘“Paid them! How are we going to pay them 
when you don’t honor our drafts?” 

“Why, my dear sir, I cannot see how you can 
find any fault with us. J am sure we have acted in 
a perfectly straightforward business way. Now let 
us look at the thing a moment. You subscribed for 
one hundred shares of the capital stock, at one thou- 
sand dollars a share, I believe?”’ 

‘‘Yes, sir, I did.” 

‘‘And Mr. Sellers took a like amount?” 

‘“Yes, sir.” 

“Very well. No concern can get along without 
money. We levied a ten per cent. assessment. It 
was the original understanding that you and Mr. 
Sellers were to have the positions you now hold, 
with salaries of six hundred dollars a month each, 
while in active service. You were duly elected to 
these places, and you accepted them. Am I right?” 

“‘Certainly.”’ 

‘Very well. You were given your instructions 
and put to work. By your reports it appears that 
you have expended the sum of $9,640 upon the 
said work. Two months’ salary to you two officers 
amounts altogether to $2,400—about one-eighth of 

274 


THE GILDED AGE 


your ten per cent. assessment, you see; which leaves 
you in debt to the company for the other seven- 
eighths of the assessment—viz., something over 
$8,000 apiece. Now, instead of requiring you to 
forward this aggregate of $16,000 or $17,000 to 
New York, the company voted unanimously to let 
you pay it over to the contractors, laborers from 
time to time, and give you credit on the books for 
it. And they did it without a murmur, too, for 
they were pleased with the progress you had made, 
and were glad to pay you that little compliment— 
and a very neat one it was, too, J am sure. The 
work you did fell short of $10,000, a trifle. Let me 
see—$ 9,640 from $20,o00o—salary $2,400 added— 
ah, yes, the balance due the company from yourself 
and Mr. Sellers is $7,960, which I will take the 
responsibility of allowing to stand for the present, 
unless you prefer to draw a check now, and thus—’” 

‘“‘Confound it, do you mean to say that instead 
of the company owing us $2,400, we owe the com- 
pany $7,960?” 

“Well, yes.”’ 

‘‘And that we owe the men and the contractors 
nearly ten thousand dollars besides?”’ 

““Owe them! Oh bless my soul, you can’t mean 
that you have not paid these people?” 

‘“But I do mean it!’ 

The president rose and walked the floor like a 
man in bodily pain. His brows contracted, he put 
his hand up and clasped his forehead, and kept saying, 
‘‘Oh, it is too bad, too bad, too bad! Oh, it is bound 
to be found out—nothing can prevent it—nothing!”’ 

275 


MARK TWAIN 


Then he threw himself into his chair and said: 

‘‘My dear Mr. Bryerson, this is dreadful—per- 
fectly dreadful. It will be found out. It is bound 
to tarnish the good name of the company; our 
credit will be seriously, most seriously impaired. 
How could you be so thoughtless—the men ought 
to have been paid though it beggared us all!” 

“They ought, ought they? ‘Then why the devil 
—my name is not Bryerson, by the way—why the 
mischief didn’t the compa—why what in the nation 
ever became of the appropriation? Where is that 
appropriation ’—if a stockholder may make so bold 
as to ask,” 

“The appropriation’—that paltry two hundred 
thousand dollars, do you mean?’ 

“Of course—but I didn’t know that two hun- 
dred thousand dollars was so very paltry. Though 
I grant, of course, that it is not a large sum, strictly 
speaking. But where is it?” 

“My dear sir, you surprise me. You surely can- 
not have had a large acquaintance with this sort of 
thing. Otherwise you would not have expected 
much of a result from a mere znitial appropriation 
like that. It was never intended for anything but 
a mere nest-egg for the future and real appropriations 
to cluster around.” 

‘Indeed? Well, was it a myth, or was it a 
reality? Whatever become of it?’’ 

‘“Why the matter is simple enough. A Congres- 
sional appropriation costs money. Just reflect, for 
instance. A majority of the House committee, say 
$10,000 apiece—$40,000; a majority of the Senate 

276 


THE “GILDED AGE 


committee, the same each—say $40,000; a little 
extra to one or two chairmen of one or two such 
committees, say $10,000 each—$20,000; and there’s 
$100,000 of the money gone, to begin with. Then, 
seven male lobbyists, at $3,000 each—$21,000; one 
female lobbyist, $10,000; a high moral Congress- 
man or Senator here and there—the high moral 
ones cost more, because they give tone to a measure 
—say ten of these at $3,000 each, is $30,000; then 
a lot of small-fry country members who won’t 
vote for anything whatever without pay—say 
twenty at $500 apiece, is $10,000; a lot of dinners 
to members—say $10,000 altogether; lot of jim- 
cracks for Congressmen’s wives and children— 
those go a long way—you can’t spend too much 
money in that line—well, those things cost in a 
lump, say $10,ooo—along there somewhere;—and 
then comes your printed documents—your maps, 
your tinted engravings, your pamphlets, your 
illuminated show-cards, your advertisements in a 
hundred and fifty papers at ever so much a line— 
because you’ve got to keep the papers all right or 
you are gone up, you know. Oh, my dear sir, 
printing bills are destruction itself. Ours, so far 
amount to—let me see—10; 52; 22; 13;—and 
then there’s 11; 14; 33—well, never mind the de- 
tails, the total in clean numbers foots up $118,254.42 
thus far!’ 

“What!” 

“Oh, yes indeed. Printing’s no bagatelle, I can 
tell you. And then there’s your contributions, as a 
company, to Chicago fires and Boston fires, and 

277 


MARK TWAIN 


orphan asylums and all that sort of thing—head the 
list, you see, with the company’s full name and a 
thousand dollars set opposite—great card, sir— 
one of the finest advertisements in the world—the 
preachers mention it in the pulpit when it’s a relig- 
ious charity—one of the happiest advertisements in 
the world is your benevolent donation. Ours have 
amounted to sixteen thousand dollars and some 
cents up to this time.”’ 

‘‘Good heavens!’’ 

“‘Oh, yes. Perhaps the biggest thing we’ve done 
in the advertising line was to get an officer of the 
U. S. government, of perfectly Himalayan official 
altitude, to write up our little internal improvement 
for a religious paper of enormous circulation—TI tell 
you, that makes our bonds go handsomely among 
the pious poor. Your religious paper is by far the 
best vehicle for a thing of this kind, because they’ll 
‘lead’ your article and put it right in the midst of 
the reading-matter; and if it’s got a few Scripture 
quotations in it, and some temperance platitudes, and 
a bit of gush here and there about Sunday-schools, 
and a sentimental snuffle now and then about ‘God’s 
precious ones, the honest hard-handed poor,’ it 
works the nation like a charm, my dear sir, and 
never a man suspects that it is an advertisement; 
but your secular paper sticks you right into the ad- 
vertising columns and of course you don’t take a 
trick. Give me a religious paper to advertise in, 
every time; and if you'll just look at their advertis- 
ing pages, you'll observe that other people think a 
good deal as I do—especially people who have got 

278 


THE GILDED AGE 


little financial schemes to make everybody rich with. 
Of course, J mean your great big metropolitan relig- 
ious papers that know how to serve God and make 
money at the same time—that’s your sort, sir, that’s 
your sort—a religious paper that isn’t run to make 
money is no use to us, as an advertising medium 
—no use to anybody in our line of business. I 
guess our next best dodge was sending a pleasure 
trip of newspaper reporters out to Napoleon. Never 
paid them a cent; just filled them up with cham- 
pagne and the fat of the land, put pen, ink, and 
paper before them while they were red-hot, and 
bless your soul when you come to read their letters 
you'd have supposed they’d been to heaven. And 
if a sentimental squeamishness held one or two of 
them back from taking a less rosy view of Napoleon, 
our hospitalities tied his tongue, at least, and he 
said nothing at all and so did us no harm. Let me 
see—have I stated all the expenses I’ve been at? 
No, I was near forgetting one or two items. There’s 
your official salaries—you can’t get good men for 
nothing. Salaries cost pretty lively. And then 
there’s your big high-sounding millionaire names 
stuck into your advertisements as stockholders— 
another card, that—and they are stockholders, too, 
but you have to give them the stock and non- 
assessable at that—so they’re an expensive lot. 
Very, very expensive thing, take it all around, is a 
big internal-improvement concern—but you see that 
yourself, Mr. Bryerson—you see that, yourself, sir.’’ 

“But look here. I think you are a little mistaken 
about its ever having cost anything for Congres- 

279 


MARK TWAIN 


sional votes. I happen to know something about 
that. I’ve let you say your say—now let me say 
mine. JI don’t wish to seem to throw any suspicion 
on anybody’s statements, because we are all lable 
to be mistaken. But how would it strike you if I 
were to say that J was in Washington all the time 
this bill was pending?—and what if I added that [ 
put the measure through myself? Yes, sir, I did 
that little thing. And, moreover, I never paid a 
dollar for any man’s vote and never promised one. 
There are some ways of doing a thing that are as 
good as others which other people don’t happen to 
think about, or don’t have the knack of succeeding 
in, if they do happen to think of them. My dear 
sir, I am obliged to knock some of your expenses in 
the head—for never a cent was paid a Congressman 
or Senator on the part of this Navigation Company.” 

The president smiled blandly, even sweetly, all 
through this harangue, and then said: 

“Ts that so?” 

““Every word of it.’’ 

‘‘Well, it does seem to alter the complexion of 
things a little. You are acquainted with the mem- 
bers down there, of course, else you could not have 
worked to such advantage?”’ 

‘*T know them all, sir. I know their wives, their 
children, their babies—I even made it a point to be 
on good terms with their lackeys. I know every 
Congressman well—even familiarly.”’ 

‘‘Very good. Do you know any of their signa- 
tures? Do you know their handwriting?” 

‘‘Why, I know their handwriting as well as I know 

j 280 


THE GILDED AGE 


my own—have had correspondence enough with 
them, I should think. And their signatures—why 
I can tell their initials, even.”’ 

The president went to a private safe, unlocked it 
and got out some letters and certain slips of paper. 
Then he said: 

‘‘Now here, for instance; do you believe that that 
is a genuine letter? Do you know this signature 
here?—and this one? Do you know who those 
initials represent—and are they forgeries?” 

Harry was stupefied. There were things there 
that made his brainswim. Presently, at the bottom 
of one of the letters he saw a signature that restored 
his equilibrium; it even brought the sunshine of a 
smile to his face. 

The president said: 

“That name amuses you. You never suspected 
him ?”’ 

“Of course I ought to have suspected him, but 
I don’t believe it ever really occurred to me. Well, 
well, well—how did you ever have the nerve to 
approach him, of all others?’’ 

‘““Why, my friend, we never think of accomplish- 
ing anything without his help. He is our mainstay. 
But how do those letters strike you?” 

“They strike me dumb! What a stone-blind 
idiot I have been!”’ 

“Well, take it all around, I suppose you had a 
pleasant time in Washington,”’ said the president, 
gathering up the letters; ‘‘of course you must have 
had. Very few men could go there and get a money 
bill through without buying a single—”’ 


281 


MARK TWAIN 


‘““Come, now, Mr. President, that’s plenty of that! I 
take back everything I said on that head. I’m a wiser 
man to-day than I was yesterday, I can tell you.” 

“T think you are. In fact, I am satisfied you 
are. But now I showed you these things in confi- 
dence, you understand. Mention facts as much as 
you want to, but don’t mention names to anybody. 
I can depend on you for that, can’t 1?” 

‘‘Oh, of course. I understand the necessity of 
that. I will not betray the names. But to go back 
a bit, it begins to look as if you never saw any of 
that appropriation at all?” 

‘We saw nearly ten thousand dollars of it—and 
that was all. Several of us took turns at log-rolling 
in Washington, and if we had charged anything for 
that service, none of that $10,000 would ever have 
reached New York.”’ 

“Tf you hadn’t levied the assessment you would 
have been in a close place, I judge?”’ 

‘“‘Close? Have you figured up the total of the 
disbursements I told you of?” 

‘*No, I didn’t think of that.’ 

‘*Well, let’s see: 


Spent in Washington, say, . .« $191,000 
Printing, advertising, etc., say,. . 118,000 
Charity, say, ae. a eG eoe 
Total, . : $325,000 
‘“The money to do that ian comes fone 
Appropriation, . ; . $200,000 
Ten per cent. assessment on cates. 
of $1,000,000, . ' ; : . 100,000 
Total, . : : : . $300,000 


282 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Which leaves us in debt some $25,000 at this 
moment. Salaries of home officers are still going 
on; also printing and advertising. Next month will 
show a state of things!” 

‘‘And then—burst up, I suppose?”’ 

‘‘By no means. Levy another assessment.” 

‘‘Oh, I see. That’s dismal.’’ 

‘“‘By no means.” 

‘“Why isn’t it? What’s the road out?” 

‘‘Another appropriation, don’t you see?”’ 

‘Bother the appropriations. They cost more than 
they come to.”’ 

‘‘Not the next one. We'll call for half a million 
—get it, and go for a million the very next month.” 

‘“Yes, but the cost of it!’ 

The president smiled, and patted his secret letters 
affectionately. He said: 

‘‘All these people are in the next Congress. We 
sha’n’t have to pay them a cent. And what is 
more, they will work like beavers for us—perhaps it 
might be to their advantage.” 

Harry reflected profoundly awhile. Then he said: 

‘“We send many missionaries to lift up the be- 
nighted races of other lands. How much cheaper 
and better it would be if those people could only 
come here and drink of our civilization at its fountain- 
head.”’ 

“IT perfectly agree with you, Mr. Beverly. Must 
you go? Well, good morning. Look in, when you 
are passing; and whenever I can give you any 
information about our affairs and prospects, I shall 
be glad to do it.”’ 

283 


MARK TWAIN 


Harry’s letter was not a long one, but it contained 
at least the calamitous figures that came out in the 
above conversation. The Colonel found himself in 
a rather uncomfortable place—no $1,200 salary 
forthcoming; and himself held responsible for half 
of the $9,640 due the workmen, to say nothing of 
being in debt to the company to the extent of nearly 
$4,000. Polly’s heart was nearly broken; the 
‘“blues’’ returned in fearful force, and she had to 
go out of the room to hide the tears that nothing 
could keep back now. 

There was mourning in another quarter, too, for 
Louise had a letter. Washington had refused, at the 
last moment, to take $40,000 for the Tennessee 
Land, and had demanded $150,000! So the trade 
fell through, and now Washington was wailing be- 
cause he had been so foolish. But he wrote that his 
man might probably return to the city, soon, and 
then he meant to sell to him, sure, even if he had to 
take $10,000. Louise had a good cry—several of 
them, indeed—and the family charitably forbore to 
make any comments that would increase her grief. 

Spring blossomed, summer came, dragged its hot 
weeks by, and the Colonel’s spirits rose, day by 
day, for the railroad was making good progress. 
But by and by something happened. Hawkeye had 
always declined to subscribe anything toward the 
railway, imagining that her large business would be 
a sufficient compulsory influence; but now Hawkeye 
was frightened; and before Colonel Sellers knew 
what he was about, Hawkeye, in a panic, had rushed 
to the front and subscribed such a sum that Napo- 

284 


Die GILDED AGE 


leon’s attractions suddenly sank into insignificance, 
and the railroad concluded to follow a comparatively 
straight course instead of going miles out of its way 
to build up a metropolis in the muddy desert of 
Stone’s Landing. 

The thunderbolt fell. After all the Colonel’s 
deep planning; after all his brain-work and tongue- 
work in drawing public attention to his pet project 
and enlisting interest in it; after all his faithful hard 
toul with his hands, and running hither and thither 
on his busy feet; after all his high hopes and splen- 
did prophecies, the fates had turned their backs on 
him at last, and all in a moment his air-castles 
crumbled to ruins about him. Hawkeye rose from 
her fright triumphant and rejoicing, and down went 
Stone’s Landing! One by one, its meager parcel of 
inhabitants packed up and moved away, as the sum- 
mer waned and fall approached. Town lots were 
no longer salable, traffic ceased, a deadly lethargy 
fell upon the place once more, the Weekly Tele- 
graph faded into an early grave, the wary tadpole 
returned from exile, the bullfrog resumed his an- 
cient song, the tranquil turtle sunned his back 
upon bank and log and drowsed his grateful life 
away as in the old sweet days of yore. 


CHAPTER XXIX 
PHILIP SURVEYS THE ILIUM COAL-LANDS 


—Mihma hatak ash osh ilhkolit yakni ya hlopullit tumaha 
holihta vlhpisa ho kyshkoa untuklo ho hollissochit holisso afohkit 
tahli cha. Chosh. 18.9. 


HILIP STERLING was on his way to Ilium, in 

the state of Pennsylvania. Ilium was the rail- 
way-station nearest to the tract of wild land which 
Mr. Bolton had commissioned him to examine. 

On the last day of the journey, as the railway-train 
Philip was on was leaving a large city, a lady timidly 
entered the drawing-room car, and hesitatingly took 
a chair that was at the moment unoccupied. Philip 
saw from the window that a gentleman had put her 
upon the car just as it was starting. In a few mo- 
ments the conductor entered, and without waiting an 
explanation, said roughly to the lady: 

‘“‘Now you can’t sit there. That seat’s taken. 
Go into the other car.”’ 

‘‘T did not intend to take the seat,’’ said the lady, 
rising. ‘‘I only sat down a moment till the conduc- 
tor should come and give me a seat.”’ 

‘There ain’t any. Car’s full. You'll have to leave.” 

‘‘But, sir,” said the lady, appealingly, ‘‘I thought—”’ 

‘‘Can’t help what you thought—you must go 
into the other car.”’ 

286 


Ties CILDED AGE 


‘‘The train is going very fast, let me stand here 
till we stop.” 

‘“‘The lady can have my seat,” cried Philip, 
springing up. The conductor turned toward Philip, 
and coolly and deliberately surveyed him from head 
to foot, with contempt in every line of his face, 
turned his back upon him without a word, and said 
to the lady: 

‘‘Come, I’ve got no time to talk. You must go 
now.” 

The lady, entirely disconcerted by such rudeness, 
and frightened, moved toward the door, opened it 
and stepped out. The train was swinging along at a 
rapid rate, jarring from side to side; the step was a 
long one between the cars, and there was no protect- 
ing grating. The lady attempted it, but lost her 
balance, in the wind and the motion of the car, and 
fell! She would inevitably have gone down under 
the wheels, if Philip, who had swiftly followed 
her, had not caught her arm and drawn her up. 
He then assisted her across, found her a seat, re- 
ceived her bewildered thanks, and returned to his car. 

The conductor was still there, taking his tickets, 
and growling something about imposition. Philip 
marched up to him, and burst out with: 

“You are a brute, an infernal brute, to treat a 
woman that way.” 

‘Perhaps you’d like to make a fuss about it,” 
sneered the conductor. 

Philip’s reply was a blow, given so suddenly and 
planted so squarely in the conductor’s face, that it 
sent him reeling over a fat passenger, who was look- 

287 


MARK TWAIN 


ing up in mild wonder that any one should dare to 
dispute with a conductor, and against the side of 
the car. 

He recovered himself, reached the bell - rope, 
“Damn you, I'll learn you,’ stepped to the door 
and called a couple of brakemen, and then, as the 
speed slackened, roared out: 

““Get off this train.” 

“I shall not get off. I have as much right here 
as you.” 

“We'll see,”’ said the conductor, advancing with 
the brakemen. The passengers protested, and some 
of them said to each other, ‘‘That’s too bad,” as 
they always do in such cases, but none of them 
offered to take a hand with Philip. The men seized 
him, wrenched him from his seat, dragged him along 
the aisle, tearing his clothes, thrust him from the 
car, and then flung his carpet-bag, overcoat, and 
umbrella after him. And the train went on. 

The conductor, red in the face and puffing from 
his exertion, swaggered through the car, muttering 
*“Puppy! I'll learn him.’”’ The passengers, when 
he had gone, were loud in their indignation, and 
talked about signing a protest, but they did nothing 
more than talk. 

The next morning the Hooverville Patriot and 
Clarion had this ‘‘item’’: 


SLIGHTUALLY OVERBOARD 


We learn that as the down noon express was leaving H—— 
yesterday a lady! (God save the mark) attempted to force 
herself into the already full palatial car. Conductor Slum, who 
is too old a bird to be caught with chaff, courteously informed 


288 


ine GILDED AGE 


her that the car was full, and when she insisted on remaining, 
he persuaded her to go into the car where she belonged. There- 
upon a young sprig, from the East, blustered up, like a Shanghai 
rooster, and began to sass the conductor with his chin music. 
That gentleman delivered the young aspirant for a muss one 
of his elegant little left-handers, which so astonished him that 
he began to feel for his shooter. Whereupon Mr. Slum gently 
raised the youth, carried him forth, and set him down just 
outside the car to cool off. Whether the young blood has yet 
made his way out of Bascom’s swamp, we have not learned. 
Conductor Slum is one of the most gentlemanly and efficient 
officers on the road; but he ain’t trifled with, not much. We 
learn that the company have put a new engine on the seven- 
o’clock train, and newly upholstered the drawing-room car 
throughout. It spares no effort for the comfort of the traveling 
public. 


Philip never had been before in Bascom’s swamp, 
and there was nothing inviting in it to detain him. 
After the train got out of the way he crawled out of 
the briers and the mud, and got upon the track. 
He was somewhat bruised, but he was too angry to 
mind that. He plodded along over the ties in a 
very hot condition of mind and body. In the 
scuffle, his railway check had disappeared, and he 
grimly wondered, as he noticed the loss, if the com- 
pany would permit him to walk over their track if 
they should know he hadn’t a ticket. 

Philip had to walk some five miles before he 
reached a little station, where he could wait for a 
train, and he had ample time for reflection. At first 
he was full of vengeance on the company. He would 
sue it. He would make it pay roundly. But then 
it occurred to him that he did not know the name 
of a witness he could summon, and that a personal 
fight against a railway corporation was about the 

289 


MARK TWAIN 


most hopeless in the world. He then thought he 
would seek out that conductor, lie in wait for him at 
some station, and thrash him, or get thrashed him- 
self. 

But as he got cooler, that did not seem to him a 
project worthy of a gentleman, exactly. Was it 
possible for a gentleman to get even with such a 
fellow as that conductor on the latter’s own plane? 
And when he came to this point, he began to ask 
himself, if he had not acted very much like a fool. 
He didn’t regret striking the fellow—he hoped he 
had left a mark on him. But, after all, was that the 
best way? Here was he, Philip Sterling, calling 
himself a gentleman, in a brawl with a vulgar con- 
ductor, about a woman he had never seen before. 
Why should he have put himself in such a ridiculous 
position? Wasn’t it enough to have offered the 
lady his seat, to have rescued her from an accident, 
perhaps from death? Suppose he had simply said 
to the conductor, ‘‘Sir, your conduct is brutal, I 
shall report you.’ The passengers, who saw the 
affair, might have joined in a report against the con- 
ductor, and he might really have accomplished some- 
thing. And, now! Philip looked at his torn clothes, 
and thought with disgust of his haste in getting 
into a fight with such an autocrat. 

At the little station where Philip waited for the 
next train, he met a man who turned out to be a 
justice of the peace in that neighborhood, and told 
him his adventure. He was a kindly sort of man, 
and seemed very much interested. 

‘‘Dum ’em,’’ said he, when he had heard the story. 

290 


Tit GILDED AGE 


‘‘Do you think anything can be done, sir?” 

‘‘Wal, I guess ’tain’t no use. I hain’t a mite of 
doubt of every word you say. But suin’s no use. 
The railroad company owns all these people along 
here, and the judges on the bench, too. Spiled 
your clothes! wal, ‘least said’s soonest mended.’ 
You hain’t no chance with the company.”’ 

When, next morning, he read the humorous ac- 
count in the Patriot and Clarion, he saw still more 
clearly what chance he would have had before the 
public in a fight with the railroad company. 

Still Philip’s conscience told him that it was his 
plain duty to carry the matter into the courts, even 
with the certainty of defeat. He confessed that 
neither he nor any citizen had a right to consult his 
own feelings or conscience in a case where a law of 
the land had been violated before his own eyes. He 
confessed that every citizen’s first duty in such a 
case is to put aside his own business and devote his 
time and his best efforts to seeing that the infraction 
is promptly punished; and he knew that no country 
can be well governed unless its citizens as a body 
keep religiously before their minds that they are the 
guardians of the law, and that the law officers are 
only the machinery for its execution, nothing more. 
As a finality he was obliged to confess that he was a 
bad citizen, and also that the general laxity of the 
time, and the absence of a sense of duty toward any 
part of the community but the individual himself 
were ingrained in him, and he was no better than 
the rest of the people. 

The result of this little adventure was that Philip 


291 


MARK TWAIN 


did not reach Ilium till daylight the next morning, 
when he descended, sleepy and sore, from a way- 
train, and looked about him. Ilium was in a narrow 
mountain gorge, through which a rapid stream ran. 
It consisted of the plank platform on which he stood, 
a wooden house, half painted, with a dirty piazza 
(unroofed) in front, and a sign-board hung on a 
slanting pole bearing the legend, “‘Hotel. P. Dusen- 
heimer,”’ a sawmill further down the stream, a black- 
smith shop, and a store, and three or four unpainted 
dwellings of the slab variety. 

As Philip approached the hotel he saw what ap- 
peared to be a wild beast crouching on the piazza. 
It did not stir, however, and he soon found that it 
was only a stuffed skin. This cheerful invitation to 
the tavern was the remains of a huge panther which 
had been killed in the region a few weeks before. 
Philip examined his ugly visage and strong crooked 
forearm, as he was waiting admittance, having 
pounded upon the door. 

“Vait a bit. Til shoost put on my trousers,” 
shouted a voice from the window, and the door was 
soon opened by the yawning landlord. 

““Morgen! Didn’t hear d’ drain oncet. Dem 
boys geeps me up zo spate. Gom right in.” 

Philip was shown into a dirty barroom. It wasa 
small room, with a stove in the middle, set in a long 
shallow box of sand, for the benefit of the “‘spit- 
ters,’ a bar across one end—a mere counter with 
a sliding glass case behind it containing a few bottles 
having ambitious labels, and a wash-sink in one 
corner. On the walls were the bright yellow-and- 

292 


ime GILDED AGE 


black handbills of a traveling circus, with pictures of 
acrobats in human pyramids, horses flying in long 
leaps through the air, and sylphlike women in a 
paradisiac costume, balancing themselves upon the 
tips of their toes on the bare backs of frantic and 
plunging steeds, and kissing their hands to the 
spectators meanwhile. 

As Philip did not desire a room at that hour, he 
was invited to wash himself at the nasty sink, a feat 
somewhat easier than drying his face, for the towel 
that hung in a roller over the sink was evidently as 
much a fixture as the sink itself, and belonged, like 
the suspended brush and comb, to the traveling 
public. Philip managed to complete his toilet by 
the use of his pocket-handkerchief, and, declining 
the hospitality of the landlord, implied in the re- 
mark, “‘You won’d dake not’in’?’’ he went into the 
open air to wait for breakfast. 

The country he saw was wild but not picturesque. 
The mountain before him might be eight hundred 
feet high, and was only a portion of a long unbroken 
range, savagely wooded, which followed the stream. 
Behind the hotel, and across the brawling brook, 
was another level-topped, wooded range, exactly like 
it. Ilium itself, seen at a glance, was old enough 
to be dilapidated, and if it had gained anything by 
being made a wood-and-water station of the new 
railroad, it was only a new sort of grime and raw- 
ness. P. Dusenheimer, standing in the door of his 
uninviting groggery, when the trains stopped for 
water, never received from the traveling public any 
patronage except facetious remarks upon his per- 

293 


MARK TWAIN 


sonal appearance. Perhaps a thousand times he 
had heard the remark, “‘Ihum fuit,”’ followed in 
most instances by a hail to himself as ‘‘A‘neas,”’ 
with the inquiry, ‘‘Where is old Anchises?” At 
first he had replied, ‘‘Dere ain’t no such man”; 
but irritated by its senseless repetition, he had lat- 
terly dropped into the formula of, ‘‘You be dam.” 

Philip was recalled from the contemplation of 
Ilium by the rolling and growling of the gong within 
the hotel, the din and clamor increasing till the 
house was apparently unable to contain it, when it 
burst out of the front door and informed the world 
that breakfast was on the table. 

The dining-room was long, low, and narrow, and 
a narrow table extended its whole length. Upon 
this was spread a cloth which, from appearance, 
might have been as long in use as the towel in the 
barroom. Upon the table was the usual service, 
the heavy, much-nicked stone ware, the row of plated 
and rusty castors, the sugar-bowls with the zinc 
teaspoons sticking up in them, the piles of yellow 
biscuits, the discouraged-looking plates of butter. 
The landlord waited, and Philip was pleased to 
observe the change in his manner. In the barroom 
he was the conciliatory landlord. Standing behind 
his guests at table, he had an air of peremptory 
patronage, and the voice in which he shot out the 
inquiry, as he seized Philip’s plate, ‘‘Beefsteak or 
liver?’ quite took away Philip’s power of choice. 
He begged for a glass of milk, after trying that 
green-hued compound called coffee, and made his 
breakfast out of that and some hard crackers which 

294 


THe GILDED AGE 


seemed to have been imported into Ilium before the 
introduction of the iron horse, and to have withstood 
a ten years’ siege of regular boarders, Greeks and 
others. 

The land that Philip had come to look at was at 
least five miles distant from Ilium station. A corner 
of it touched the railroad, but the rest was pretty 
much an unbroken wilderness, eight or ten thousand 
acres of rough country, most of it such a mountain 
range as he saw at Ilium. 

His first step was to hire three woodsmen to ac- 
company him. By their help he built a log hut, 
and established a camp on the land, and then began 
his explorations, mapping down his survey as he 
went along, noting the timber, and the lay of the 
land, and making superficial observations as to the 
prospect of coal. | 

The landlord at Ilium endeavored to persuade 
Philip to hire the services of a witch-hazel professor 
of that region, who could walk over the land with 
his wand and tell him infallibly whether it contained 
coal, and exactly where the strata ran. But Philip 
preferred to trust to his own study of the country, 
and his knowledge of the geological formation. He 
spent a month in traveling over the land and making 
calculations: and made up his mind that a fine vein 
of coal ran through the mountain about a mile from 
the railroad, and that the place to run in a tunnel 
was half-way toward its summit. 

Acting with his usual promptness, Philip, with the 
consent of Mr. Bolton, broke ground there at once, 
and, before snow came, had some rude buildings up, 

295 


MARK TWAIN 


and was ready for active operations in the spring. 
It was true that there were no outcroppings of coal 
at the place, and the people at [lium said he “‘mought 
as well dig for plug terbaccer there’; but Philip 
had great faith in the uniformity of nature’s opera- 
tions in ages past, and he had no doubt that he 
should strike at this spot the rich vein that had 
made the fortune of the Golden Briar Company. 


CHAPTER XXX 
SENATOR DILWORTHY INVITES LAURA TO WASHINGTON 


—Gran pensier volgo; e, se tu lui secondi, 
Seguiranno gli effetti alle speranze: 
Tessi la tela, ch’ io ti mostro ordita, 


Di cauto vecchio esecutrice ardita. 
Tasso. 


Belle domna vostre socors 
M’agra mestier, s’a vos plagues. 
B. de Ventadour. 


NCE more Louise had good news from her 

Washington—Senator Dilworthy was going to 
sell the Tennessee Land to the government! Louise 
told Laura in confidence. She had told her parents, 
too, and also several bosom friends; but all of these 
people had simply looked sad when they heard the 
news, except Laura. Laura’s face suddenly bright- 
ened under it—only for an instant, it is true, but 
poor Louise was grateful for even that fleeting 
ray of encouragement. When next Laura was alone, 
she fell into a train of thought something like 
this: 

“Tf the Senator has really taken hold of this 
matter, I may look for that invitation to his house 
at any moment. I am perishing to go! I do long 
to know whether I am only simply a large-sized 
pygmy among these pygmies here, who tumble over 

207 


MARK TWAIN 


so easily when one strikes them, or whether I am 
really—’’ Her thoughts drifted into other chan- 
nels, for a season. Then she continued: ‘‘He said 
I could be useful in the great cause of philanthropy, 
and help in the blessed work of uplifting the poor 
and the ignorant, if he found it feasible to take hold 
of our Land. Well, that is neither here nor there; 
what I want, is to go to Washington and find out 
what Iam. I want money, too; and if one may 
judge by what she hears, there are chances there for 
a—’ For a fascinating woman, she was going to 
say, perhaps, but she did not. 

Along in the fall the invitation came, sure enough. 
It came officially through brother Washington, the 
private secretary, who appended a postscript that 
was brimming with delight over the prospect of 
seeing the Duchess again. He said it would be 
happiness enough to look upon her face once more 
—it would be almost too much happiness when to 
it was added the fact that she would bring messages 
with her that were fresh from Louise’s lips. 

In Washington’s letter were several important 
inclosures. For instance, there was the Senator’s 
check for two thousand dollars—‘‘to buy suitable 
clothes in New York with!’ It was a loan to be re- 
funded when the Land was sold. Two thousand— 
this was fine indeed. Louise’s father was called 
rich, but Laura doubted if Louise had ever had 
four hundred dollars’ worth of new clothing at one 
time in her life. With the check came two through 
tickets—good on the railroad from Hawkeye to Wash- 
ington via New York—and they were ‘‘dead-head”’ 

2098 


THE GILDED AGE 


tickets, too, which had been given to Senator Dil- 
worthy by the railway companies. Senators and 
Representatives were paid thousands of dollars by 
the government for traveling expenses, but they 
always traveled ‘‘dead-head”’ both ways, and then 
did as any honorable, high-minded men would nat- 
urally do—declined to receive the mileage tendered 
them by the government. The Senator had plenty 
of railway passes, and could easily spare two to 
Laura—one for herself and one for a male escort. 
Washington suggested that she get some old friend 
of the family to come with her, and said the Sena- 
tor would ‘‘dead-head’’ him home again as soon 
as he had grown tired of the sights of the capital. 
Laura thought the thing over. At first she was 
pleased with the idea, but presently she began to 
feel differently about it. Finally she said, ‘‘No, our 
staid, steady-going Hawkeye friends’ notions and 
mine differ about some things—they respect me, 
now, and I respect them—better leave it so—I will 
go alone; I am not afraid to travel by myself.” 
And so communing with herself, she left the house 
for an afternoon walk. 

Almost at the door she met Colonel Sellers. She 
told him about her invitation to Washington. 

‘*Bless me!’’ said the Colonel. ‘‘I have about 
made up my mind to go there myself. You see 
we've got to get another appropriation through, and 
the company want me to come East and put it 
through Congress. Harry’s there, and he’ll do what 
he can, of course; and Harry’s a good fellow and 
always does the very best he knows how, but then 

299 


MARK TWAIN 


he’s young—rather young for some parts of such 
work, you know—and besides he talks too much, 
talks a good deal too much; and sometimes he ap- 
pears to be a little bit visionary, too, I think—the 
worst thing in the world for a business man. A 
man like that always exposes his cards, sooner or 
later. This sort of thing wants an old, quiet, steady 
hand—wants an old cool head, you know, that 
knows men, through and through, and is used to 
large operations. I’m expecting my salary, and 
also some dividends from the company, and if they 
get along in time, I’ll go along with you, Laura— 
take you under my wing—you mustn’t travel alone. 
Lord, I wish I had the money right now. But there’ll 
be plenty soon—plenty.”’ 

Laura reasoned with herself that if the kindly, 
simple-hearted Colonel was going anyhow, what 
could she gain by traveling alone and throwing away 
his company? So she told him she accepted his 
offer gladly, gratefully. She said it would be the 
greatest of favors if he would go with her and pro- 
tect her—not at his own expense as far as railway 
fares were concerned, of course; she could not ex- 
pect him to put himself to so much trouble for her 
and pay his fare besides. But he wouldn’t hear of 
her paying his fare—it would be only a pleasure to 
him to serve her. Laura insisted on furnishing the 
tickets; and finally, when argument failed, she said 
the tickets cost neither her nor any one else a cent 
—she had two of them—she needed but one—and if 
he would not take the other she would not go with 
him. That settled the matter. He took the ticket. 


300 


es GIL PDp ACE 


Laura was glad that she had the check for new 
clothing, for she felt very certain of being able to 
get the Colonel to borrow a little of the money to 
pay hotel bills with, here and there. 

She wrote Washington to look for her and Colonel 
Sellers toward the end of November; and at about 
the time set the two travelers arrived safe in the 
capital of the nation, sure enough. 


CHAPTER XXXI 


PHILIP BREAKS HIS ARM. RUTH ASSISTS THE 
SURGEON 


Deh! ben féra all’ incontro ufficio umano, 
E bed n’avresti tu gioja e diletto, 
Se la pietosa tua medica mano 


Avvicinassi al valoroso petto. 
Tasso. 


She, gracious lady, yet no paines did spare 
To doe him ease, or doe him remedy: 
Many restoratives of vertues rare 

And costly cordialles she did apply, 


To mitigate his stubborne malady. 
Spenser's Faerie Queene. 


R.HENRY BRIERLY was exceedingly busy in 
New York, so he wrote Colonel Sellers, but 
he would drop everything and go to Washington. 

The Colonel believed that Harry was the prince 
of lobbyists, a little too sanguine, maybe, and given 
to speculation, but, then, he knew everybody; the 
Columbus River navigation scheme was got through 
almost entirely by his aid. He was needed now to 
help through another scheme, a benevolent scheme 
in which Colonel Sellers, through the Hawkinses, 
had a deep interest. 

“T don’t care, you know,” he wrote to Harry, 
“‘so much about the niggroes. But if the govern- 
ment will buy this land, it will set up the Hawkins 

302 


THE GILDED AGE 


family—make Laura an heiress—and I shouldn't 
wonder if Beriah Sellers would set up his carriage 
again. Dilworthy looks at it different, of course. 
He’s all for philanthropy, for benefiting the colored 
race. There’s old Balaam, was in the Interior— 
used to be the Rev. Orson Balaam of Iowa—he’s 
made the riffle on the Injun; great Injun pacificator 
and land-dealer. Balaam’s got the Injun to himself, 
and I suppose that Senator Dilworthy feels that 
there is nothing left him but the colored man. I 
do reckon he is the best friend the colored man has 
got in Washington.” 

Though Harry was in a hurry to reach Washing- 
ton, he stopped in Philadelphia, and prolonged his 
visit day after day, greatly to the detriment of his 
business both in New York and Washington. The 
society at the Boltons’ might have been a valid 
excuse for neglecting business much more important 
than his. Philip was there; he was a partner with 
Mr. Bolton now in the new coal venture, concerning 
which there was much to be arranged in preparation 
for the spring work, and Philip lingered week after 
week in the hospitable house. Alice was making a 
winter visit. Ruth only went to town twice a week 
to attend lectures, and the household was quite to 
Mr. Bolton’s taste, for he liked the cheer of com- 
pany and something going on evenings. Harry was 
cordially asked to bring his traveling-bag there, and 
he did not need urging to do so. Not even the 
thought of seeing Laura at the capital made him 
restless in the society of the two young ladies; two 
birds in hand are worth one in the bush certainly. 

303 


MARK TWAIN 


Philip was at home—he sometimes wished he 
were not so much so. He felt that too much or not 
enough was taken for granted. Ruth had met him, 
when he first came, with a cordial frankness, and her 
manner continued entirely unrestrained. She neither 
sought his company nor avoided it, and this perfectly 
level treatment irritated him more than any other 
could have done. It was impossible to advance 
much in love-making with one who offered no 
obstacles, had no concealments and no embarrass- 
ments, and whom any approach to sentimentality 
would be quite likely to set into a fit of laughter. 

‘Why, Phil,” she would say, ‘‘what puts you in 
the dumps to-day? You are as solemn as the upper 
bench in Meeting. I shall have to call Alice to raise 
your spirits; my presence seems to depress you.”’ 

“It’s not your presence, but your absence when 
you are present,’’ began Philip, dolefully, with the 
idea that he was saying a rather deep thing. ‘But 
you won’t understand me.”’ 

‘‘No, I confess I cannot. If you really are so 
low as to think I am absent when I am present, it’s 
a frightful case of aberration; I shall ask father to 
bring out Dr. Jackson. Does Alice appear to be 
present when she is absent?”’ 

‘““Alice has some human feeling, anyway. She 
cares for something besides musty books and dry 
bones. I think, Ruth, when I die,’”’ said Philip, 
intending to be very grim and sarcastic, “‘I’ll leave 
you my skeleton. You might like that.”’ 

“It might be more cheerful than you are at 
times,’”’ Ruth replied with a laugh. ‘“‘But you 

304 


THE “GILDED AGE 


mustn’t do it without consulting Alice. She might 
not like it.” 

“T don’t know why you should bring Alice up on 
every occasion. Do you think I am in love with 
her ?”’ 

‘Bless you, no. It never entered my head. Are 
you? The thought of Philip Sterling in love is too 
comical. JI thought you were only in love with the 
Ilium coal-mine, which you and father talk about 
half the time.”’ 

This is a specimen of Philip’s wooing. Confound 
the girl, he would say to himself, why does she 
never tease Harry and that young Shepley who 
comes here? 

How differently Alice treated him. She at least 
never mocked him, and it was a relief to talk with 
one who had some sympathy with him. And he 
did talk to her, by the hour, about Ruth. The 
blundering fellow poured all his doubts and anxieties 
into her ear, as if she had been the impassive occu- 
pant of one of those little wooden confessionals in 
the Cathedral on Logan Square. Has a confessor, 
if she is young and pretty, any feeling? Does it 
mend the matter by calling her your sister? 

Philip called Alice his good sister, and talked to her 
about love and marriage, meaning Ruth, as if sisters 
could by no possibility have any personal concern in 
such things. Did Ruth ever speak of him? Did she 
think Ruth cared for him? Did Ruth care for any- 
body at Fallkill? Did she care for anything except 
her profession? And so on. 

Alice was loyal to Ruth, and if she knew anything 


395 


MARK TWAIN 


she did not betray her friend. She did not, at any 
rate, give Philip too much encouragement. What 
woman, under the circumstances, would? 

“T can tell you one thing, Philip,’’ she said, ‘‘if 
ever Ruth Bolton loves, it will be with her whole 
soul, in a depth of passion that will Bae! every- 
thing before it and surprise even herself.”’ 

A remark that did not much console Philip, who 
imagined that only some grand heroism could un- 
lock the sweetness of such a heart; and Philip feared 
that he wasn’t a hero. He did not know out of 
what materials a woman can construct a hero, when 
she is in the creative mood. 

Harry skipped into this society with his usual 
lightness and gaiety. His good nature was inex- 
haustible, and though he liked to relate his own 
exploits, he had a little tact in adapting himself to 
the tastes of his hearers. He was not long in find- 
ing out that Alice liked to hear about Philip, and 
Harry launched out into the career of his friend in 
the West, with a prodigality of invention that would 
have astonished the chief actor. He was the most 
generous fellow in the world, and picturesque con- 
versation was the one thing in which he never was 
bankrupt. With Mr. Bolton he was the serious man 
of business, enjoying the confidence of many of the 
moneyed men in New York, whom Mr. Bolton knew, 
and engaged with them in railway schemes and gov- 
ernment contracts. Philip, who had so long known 
Harry, never could make up his mind that Harry did 
not himself believe that he was a chief actor in all 
these large operations of which he talked so much. 

306 


THE GILDED AGE 


Harry did not neglect to endeavor to make him- 
self agreeable to Mrs. Bolton, by paying great atten- 
tion to the children, and by professing the warmest 
interest in the Friends’ faith. It always seemed to 
him the most peaceful religion; he thought it must 
be much easier to live by an internal light than by a 
lot of outward rules; he had a dear Quaker aunt in 
Providence of whom Mrs. Bolton constantly re- 
minded him. He insisted upon going with Mrs. 
Bolton and the children to the Friends’ Meeting on 
First Day, when Ruth and Alice and Philip, ‘‘world’s 
people,’’ went to a church in town, and he sat 
through the hour of silence with his hat on, in most 
exemplary patience. In short, this amazing actor 
succeeded so well with Mrs. Bolton, that she said 
to Philip one day: 

‘“Thy friend, Henry Brierly, appears to be a very 
worldly minded young man. Does he believe in 
anything ?’’ 

“Oh, yes,’’ said Philip laughing, ‘‘he believes in 
more things than any other person I ever saw.” 

To Ruth Harry seemed to be very congenial. He 
was never moody for one thing, but lent himself 
with alacrity to whatever her fancy was. He was 
gay or grave as the need might be. No one appar- 
ently could enter more fully into her plans for an 
independent career. 

‘“My father,’’ said Harry, ‘‘was bred a physi- 
cian, and practised a little before he went into Wall 
Street. J always had a leaning to the study. There 
was a skeleton hanging in the closet of my father’s 
study when I was a boy, that J used to dress up in 

3°97 


MARK TWAIN 


old clothes. Oh, I got quite familiar with the 
human frame.” 

‘You must have,’ said Philip. ‘‘Was that where 
you learned to play the bones? He is a master of 
those musical instruments, Ruth; he plays well 
enough to go on the stage.”’ 

‘“‘Philip hates science of any kind, and steady ap- 
plication,” retorted Harry. He didn’t fancy Philip’s 
banter, and when the latter had gone out, and Ruth 
asked: 

‘Why don’t you take up medicine, Mr. Brierly?” 

Harry said, “‘I haveitin mind. I believe I would 
begin attending lectures this winter if it weren’t for 
being wanted in Washington. But medicine is par- 
ticularly women’s province.”’ 

‘Why so?” asked Ruth, rather amused. 

‘Well, the treatment of disease is a good deal a 
matter of sympathy. A woman’s intuition is better 
than a man’s. Nobody knows anything, really, you 
know, and a woman can guess a good deal nearer 
than a man.”’ 

‘You are very complimentary to my sex.” 

“But,” said Harry frankly, “‘I should want to 
choose my doctor. An ugly woman would ruin me; 
the disease would be sure to strike in and kill me 
at sight of her. I think a pretty physician, with 
engaging manners, would coax a fellow to live through 
almost anything.”’ 

‘‘I am afraid you are a scoffer, Mr. Brierly.” 

‘‘On the contrary, I am quite sincere. Wasn't it 
old what’s his name? that said only the beautiful 
is useful ?”’ 

208 


THE GILDED AGE 


Whether Ruth was anything more than diverted 
with Harry’s company, Philip could not determine. 
He scorned, at any rate, to advance his own interest 
by any disparaging communications about Harry, 
both because he could not help liking the fellow 
himself, and because he may have known that he 
could not more surely create a sympathy for him in 
Ruth’s mind. That Ruth was in no danger of any 
serious impression he felt pretty sure, felt certain of 
it when he reflected upon her severe occupation with 
her profession. Hang it! he would say to himself, 
she is nothing but pure intellect anyway. And he 
only felt uncertain of it when she was in one of her 
moods of raillery, with mocking mischief in her eyes. 
At such times she seemed to prefer Harry’s society to 
his. When Philip was miserable about this, he al- 
ways took refuge with Alice, who was never moody, 
and who generally laughed him out of his sentimental 
nonsense. He felt at his ease with Alice, and was 
never in want of something to talk about; and he 
could not account for the fact that he was so often 
dull with Ruth, with whom, of all persons in the 
world, he wanted to appear at his best. 

Harry was entirely satisfied with his own situation. 
A bird of passage is always at its ease, having no 
house to build, and no responsibility. He talked 
freely with Philip about Ruth, an almighty fine girl, 
he said, but what the deuce she wanted to study 
medicine for, he couldn’t see. 

There was a concert one night at the Musical 
Fund Hall, and the four had arranged to go in and 
return by the Germantown cars. It was Philip’s 

309 


MARK TWAIN 


plan, who had engaged the seats, and promised him- 
self an evening with Ruth, walking with her, sitting 
by her in the hall, and enjoying the feeling of pro- 
tecting that a man always has of a woman in a 
public place. He was fond of music, too, in a 
sympathetic way; at least, he knew that Ruth’s 
delight in it would be enough for him. 

Perhaps he meant to take advantage of the occa- 
sion to say some very serious things. His love for 
Ruth was no secret to Mrs. Bolton, and he felt 
almost sure that he should have no opposition in 
the family. Mrs. Bolton had been cautious in what 
she said, but Philip inferred everything from her 
reply to his own questions, one day, ‘‘Has thee ever 
spoken thy mind to Ruth?” 

Why shouldn’t he speak his mind, and end his 
doubts? Ruth had been more tricksy than usual 
that day, and in a flow of spirits quite inconsistent, 
it would seem, in a young lady devoted to grave 
studies. 

Had Ruth a premonition of Philip’s intention, in 
his manner? It may be, for when the girls came 
down-stairs, ready to walk to the cars, and met 
Philip and Harry in the hall, Ruth said, laughing: 

‘‘The two tallest must walk together,’’ and be- 
fore Philip knew how it happened Ruth had taken 
Harry’s arm, and his evening was spoiled. He had 
too much politeness and good sense and kindness to 
show in his manner that he was hit. So he said to 
Harry: 

‘“That’s your disadvantage in being short.’’ And 
he gave Alice no reason to feel during the evening 

310 


THE GILDED AGE 


that she would not have been his first choice for the 
excursion. But he was none the less chagrined, and 
not a little angry at the turn the affair took. 

The hall was crowded with the fashion of the 
town. The concert was one of those fragmentary 
drearinesses that people endure because they are 
fashionable: tours de force on the piano, and frag- 
ments from operas, which have no meaning without 
the setting, with weary pauses of waiting between; 
there is the comic basso who is so amusing and on 
such familiar terms with the audience, and always 
sings the Barber; the attitudinizing tenor, with his 
languishing “‘Oh, Summer Night’’; the soprano with 
her ‘‘Batti Batti,’’ who warbles and trills and runs 
and fetches her breath, and ends with a noble scream 
that brings down a tempest of applause, in the 
midst of which she backs off the stage smiling and 
bowing. It was this sort of concert, and Philip was 
thinking that it was the most stupid one he ever sat 
through, when just as the soprano was in the midst 
of that touching ballad, ‘‘Comin’ thro’ the Rye”’ 
(the soprano always sings ‘‘Comin’ thro’ the Rye”’ 
on an encore—the Black Swan used to make it irre- 
sistible, Philip remembered, with her arch, ‘‘If a body 
kiss a body’’) there was a cry of ‘‘Fire!’’ 

The hall is long and narrow, and there is only one 
place of egress. Instantly the audience was on its 
feet, and a rush began for the door. Men shouted, 
women screamed, and panic seized the swaying 
mass. A second’s thought would have convinced 
every one that getting out was impossible, and that 
the only effect of a rush would be to crush people 

311 


MARK TWAIN 


to death. But a second’s thought was not given. 
A few cried ‘‘Sit down, sit down,’ but the mass 
was turned toward the door. Women were down 
and trampled on in the aisles, and stout men, utter- 
ly lost to self-control, were mounting the benches, 
as if to rum a race over the mass to the en- 
trance. 

Philip, who had forced the girls to keep their seats, 
saw, in a flash, the new danger, and sprang to avert 
it. In a second more those infuriated men would 
be over the benches and crushing Ruth and Alice 
under their boots. He leaped upon the bench in 
front of them and struck out before him with all his 
might, felling one man who was rushing on him, and 
checking for an instant the movement, or rather 
parting it, and causing it to flow on either side of 
him. But it was only for an instant; the pressure 
behind was too great, and the next Philip was dashed 
backward over the seat. 

And yet that instant of arrest had probably saved 
the girls, for, as Philip fell, the orchestra struck up 
‘Yankee Doodle” in the liveliest manner. The 
familiar tune caught the ear of the mass, which 
paused in wonder, and gave the conductor’s voice a 
chance to be heard—‘‘It’s a false alarm!” 

The tumult was over in a minute, and the next 
laughter was heard, and not a few said, ‘‘I knew it 
wasn’t anything.’”’ ‘‘What fools people are at such 
a time!’’ 

The concert was over, however. A good many 
people were hurt, some of them seriously, and 
among them Philip Sterling was found bent across 

312 


Paik GClilLeaD AGE 


the seat, insensible, with his left arm hanging limp 
and a bleeding wound on his head. 

When he was carried into the air he revived, and 
said it was nothing. A surgeon was called, and it 
was thought best to drive at once to the Boltons’, 
the surgeon supporting Philip, who did not speak 
the whole way. His arm was set and his head 
dressed, and the surgeon said he would come round 
all right in his mind by morning; he was very weak. 
Alice, who was not much frightened while the panic 
lasted in the hall, was very much unnerved by seeing 
Philip so pale and bloody. Ruth assisted the sur- 
geon with the utmost coolness and with skilful hands 
helped to dress Philip’s wounds. And there was a 
certain intentness and fierce energy in what she did 
that might have revealed something to Philip if he 
had been in his senses. 

But he was not, or he would not have murmured, 
‘‘Let Alice do it, she is not too tall.”’ 

It was Ruth’s first case. 


TRANSLATIONS 


OF 


CHAPTER-HEAD MOTTOES 


BY 
J. HAMMOND TRUMBULL, LL.D., L.H.D. 


TITLE, page iii. 

Chinese: Hie li sh4n ching yu: tung sin ni pien kin. 
Literally, By combined strength, a mountain becomes gems: 
by united hearts, mud turns to gold. 

[A maxim often painted on the door-posts of a Chinese 
firm—which may be freely translated—Two heads, work- 
ing together, out of commonplace materials, bring THE 
GILDED AGE.] 


CuHaPTER I, page 1. 
Chippeway: “‘He owns much land.’—Baraga. 


CuHapTeER II, page 14. 


Ethiopic: “It behoveth Christian people who have not 
children, to take up the children of the departed, whether 
youths or virgins, and to make them as their own chil- 
dréen,”’ etc. 

The Didascalia (translated by T. Platt), 121. 


CuaptTerR III, page 109. 


Old French: [Pantagruel and Panurge, on their voyage to 
the Oracle of Bacbuc, are frightened by seeing afar off, ‘‘a 
huge monstrous physeter.”’ ‘‘Poor Panurge began to cry 
and howl worse than ever:] Babillebabou, said he, [shrug- 
ging up his shoulders, quivering with fear, there will be the 


315 


MARK TWAIN. 


devil upon dun.] This will be a worse business than that 
the other day. Let us fly, let us fly!) Old Nick take me, if 
it is not Leviathan, described by the noble prophet Moses, 
in the life of patient Job. It will swallow us all like a dose 
of pills. . . . Look, look, it is upon us. Oh! how horrible 
and abominable thou art! .. Oh, oh! Devil, Sathanas, 
Leviathan! I cannot bear to look upon thee, thou art so 
abominably ugly.’—Motteux’s Translation. 


CHAPTER V, page 39. 


Sindhi: “Having removed the little daughter, and placed 
her in their own house, they instructed her.”’—Lzfe of Abd- 
ul-Latif, 46 (cited in Trumpp’s Sindhi grammar, p. 356). 

French Proverb: He would dry snow in the oven, to sell it 
for table salt.—Quitard, 193. 


CHAPTER VI, page 50. 


Chinese: [Shap neen tseen sze, ke fan sun.] The affairs of 
ten years past, how often have they been new. 
Chippeway. 
“So blooms the human face divine, 
When youth its pride of beauty shows: 
Fairer than Spring the colors shine, 
And sweeter than the virgin rose.” 
Ojibwa Hymns. (Am. Tract Society), p. 78. 


CHAPTER IX, page 85. 


Italian: When I saw thee for the first time, it seemed to 
me that paradise was opened, and that the angels were 
coming, one by one, all to rest on thy lovely face, all to rest 
on thy beautiful head; Thou bindest me in chains, and I 
cannot loose myself. 

J. Caselli, Chants popul de Italie, 21. 

Choctaw: ‘‘Now therefore divide this land for an in- 
heritance.””—Joshua, xiii. 7. 

Eskimo (Greenland), from Fabricius’s translation of 
Genesis:—‘‘ And when he had made an end of commanding 
his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded. 
up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.”’ 

First Book of Moses, xlix. 32. 


316 


THE GILDED AGE 


CHAPTER X, page 93. 

Eskimo:—“ And said, ‘Whose daughter art thou? tell me, 
I pray thee.’”’—Gen. xxiv. 23. 

Massachusetts Indian (Eliot’s version of Psalm xlv. 10): 
‘Harken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; 
forget also thine own people, and thy father’s house.” 

Italian:—“ Jeannette answered: ‘Madame, you have 
taken me from my father and brought me up as your own 
child, and for this I ought to do all in my power to please 
you.” 


CHAPTER XI, page 104. 


Japan: Though he eats, he knows not the taste of what 
he eats. 


CHAPTER XII, page 112. 


Egyptian (from the Book of the Dead, or Funereal Ritual, 
edited by Lepsius from the Turin papyrus; translated by 
Birch). ‘‘The Preparation in the West. The Roads of 
the West.” 


CHAPTER XIV, page 134. 


From Thomas Makin’s Description of Pennsylvania (De- 
scriptio Pennsylvaniz) 1729. Translated [?] by Robert Proud: 
“Fair Philadelphia next is rising seen, 
Between two rivers plac’d, two miles between, 
The Delaware and Sculkil, new to fame, 
Both ancient streams, yet of a modern name. 
The city, form’d upon a beauteous plan, 
Has many houses built, tho’ late began; 
Rectangular the streets, direct and fair; 
And rectilinear all the ranges are.” 
Italian (translated by Wiffen—from Tasso): 
“Of generous thoughts and principles sublime, 
Amongst them in the city lived a maid, 
The flower of virgins, in her ripest prime, 
Supremely beautiful! but that she made 
Never her care, or beauty only weighed 
In worth with virtue.” 
Jerusalem Delivered, c. u., st. 14. 


317 


MARK TWAIN 


CHAPTER XV, page 143. 


Latin: [Celsus] I think the healing art ought to be based 
on reason to be sure, and too that it should be founded on 
unmistakable evidences, all uncertainties being rejected, not 
from the serious attention of a physician, but from the very 
profession itself. 


CHAPTER XVI, page 155. 


Egyptian (from the Book of the Dead), in Birch’s trans- 
lation: ‘I have come.” ‘“‘Make Road expresses what I 
am”? (i.e., is my name). 


CHAPTER XVIII, page 176. 


Tamachekh (Touareg): From an improvisation by a na- 
tive poet, at Algiers; printed by Hanoteau, Essat de Gram- 
maise de Langeu Tamachek, p. 207. 

—If she should come to our country (the plains), there is 
not a man who would not run to see her. 

Romance: 

—‘Enough! she cries, henceforth thou art 

The friend and master of my heart. 
No other covenant I require 
Than this: ‘I take thee for my wife.’ 
That done, enjoy thy heart’s desire, 
Of me and mine the lord for life.” 
A. Bruce Whyte’s paraphrase. 
CHAPTER XIX, page 187. 
German: from the “‘ Book of Songs”’ (Angelique, 4) of Heine. 


“O how rapidly develop 
From mere fugitive sensations 
Passions that are fierce and boundless, 
Tenderest associations! 
Tow’rds this lady grows the bias 
Of my heart on each occasion, 
And that I’m enamoured of her . 
Has become my firm persuasion.” 


CHAPTER XX, page 108. 


Old Irish: from the Annals of the Four Masters (vol. vi., 
p. 2298). O’Donovan translates: 


318 


THE GILDED AGE 


—‘‘A sweet-sounding trumpet; endowed with the gift of 
eloquence and address, of sense and counsel, and with the 
look of amiability in his countenance, which captivated 
every one who beheld him.” 


CHAPTER XXI, page 207. 
[Let each one know how to follow his own path.] 


CHAPTER XXII, page 216. 


“Ts there on earth such a transport as this, 

When the look of the loved one avows her bliss? 

Can life an equal joy impart 

To the bliss that lives in a lover’s heart? 

O! he, be assured, hath never proved 

Life’s holiest joys who hath never loved! 

Yet the joys of love, so heavenly fair, 

Can exist but when honor and virtue are there.” 

Translated by Richardson. 

Hawatian: Love is that which excels in attractiveness (is 
much better than) the dish of poz and the fish-bow! (the 
favorite dishes of the Islanders). 


CHAPTER XXIV, page 233. 


Sioux-Dakota (from Riggs’s translation of Bunyan’s Pil- 
grim’s Progress). 

“Christian. This town of Fair-Speech—I have heard of 
it; and as I remember, they say it’s a wealthy place. 

By-Ends. Yes,I assure you that it is; and I have very 
many rich kindred there.”’ 


CHAPTER XXV, page. 245. 


Assyrian:—‘A place very difficult.” 
Smith’s Assurbanipal, p. 269 (1. 90). 


CHAPTER XXVI, page 253. 
Tamul: Money is very scarce. 


CuHaPTeR XXVII, page 264. 


Egyptian: ‘“‘Things prepare I. I prepare a road.” 
Book of the Dead, xliv. 117. 1, 2. 


319 


MARK TWAIN 


Greek (post-classical): 

‘“And when he saw his eyes were out, 
With all his might and main, 
He jumped into another bush, 
And scratched them in again.” 


CHAPTER XXVIII, page 272. 


Danish proverb: “He who would buy sausage of a dog, 
must give him bacon in exchange.” 

German: “ Thrasyllus, with his unaided intellect, would 
not have succeeded; but such worthies can always find 
rogues who for money will lend brains, which is just as well 
as to have brains of their own.” 


CHAPTER XXIX, page 286. 


Choctaw translation of Joshua xviii. g: ‘‘And the men went 
and passed through the land, and described it {by cities, into 
seven parts] in a book.” 


CHAPTER XXX, page 297. 


Italian: in Wiffen’s translation: 
“IT nurse a mighty project: the design 
But needs thy gentle guidance to commend 
My hopes to sure success; the thread I twine; 
Weave thou the web, the lively colors blend; 
What cautious Age begins, let Dauntless Beauty end.” 
Provencal: ‘Fair lady, your help is needful to me, if you 
please.” 


CHAPTER XXXI, page 302. 
Italian: from the Jerusalem Delivered, c. vi. st. 76: 
“It would be some humanity to stand 
His dutiful physician! what delight 
Would it not be to lay thy healing hand 
Upon the young man’s breast!” Wiffen. 


END OF VOL. I 


THE GILDED AGE 
VOL. II 


CONTENTS 


Laura’s SuCCESS IN WASHINGTON SOCIETY 

LAURA RECEIVES GALLS FROM THE ARISTOCRACIES . 

LAURA IN THE LOBBY. . .......6e 

How MAJORITIES ARE SECURED ....... 

THE BOOK-STORE CLERK . ; 

LAuRA COQUETS WITH BUCKSTONE 

LaurRA SEES COLONEL SELBY AGAIN 

LaurRA AGAIN IN LOVE WITH SELBY .. . 

How WASHINGTON NEws LEAKS OuT 

Harry HOPELESSLY IN LOVE an : 

Mr. TROLLoP 1s TRAPPED AND BECOMES AN ALLY 

NEWSPAPERS ATTACK THE UNIVERSITY BILL . 

Puitip SHOWS His FRIENDSHIP FOR BRIERLY 

Wuy Mr. BUCKSTONE SUPPORTED THE UNIVERSITY 
EE es wo 

LAURA KiILLs COLONEL SELBY . 

LAURA IN THE TOMBS. 3 a 

Mr. BIGLER HELPED OUT WHILE Mr. BoLton Runs 
IN DEBT = : 

. Paitip Just Misses STRIKING Cage 

A Bap Fix. Pariip SEEs a Way Ovut oF IT 

CONGRESSIONAL PRELIMINARIES. SELLERS JUSTLY 
OFFENDED Re O_o See . 

Mora INFLUENCES TO HELP THE UNIVERSITY ii 

DILWORTHY AT SAINT’S REST, PREPARES FOR RE- 
ELECTION . - . ae es eee 

. Laura’s Tria. AN INTELLIGENT — AND MODEL 
JUDGE . 


17 
124 


133 
147 
158 
167 
177 
188 


200 
210 


213 


222 


CHAP. 
XXIV. 
XXV. 
XXXVI. 
XXVIT. 
XXVITI. 


XXIX. 
XXX. 
XXXI. 
XXXII, 


CONTENTS 


THE LEARNED COUNSEL 

PROGRESS OF THE TRIAL 

WAITING FOR TELEGRAMS : 

THE VERDICT. LAURA ACQUITTED. .... .e 

THE SENATE, JEALOUS OF ITs HoNoR, REBUKES 
CORRUPTION 

THE FaTE OF LAURA aero. 2 

WASHINGTON HAWKINS TAKES A NEw START . 

Luck WILL Turn. A JOYFUL SURPRISE 

RutnH’s RECOVERY. THE FUTURE OF THE END. . 

APPENDIX . ee, 

TRANSLATIONS OF CHAPTER-HEAD MOTTOES . 


PAGE 
233 
244 
256 
265 


276 
291 
301 
310 
317 
329 
331 


THE GILDED AGE 


CHAPTER I 
LAURA'S SUCCESS IN WASHINGTON SOCIETY 


Lo, swiche sleightes and subtiltees 
In women ben; for ay as besy as bees 
Ben they us sely men for to deceive, 


And from a sothe wol they ever weive.! 
Chaucer. 


ASHINGTON’S delight in his beautiful sister 

was measureless. He said that she had al- 
ways been the queenliest creature in the land, but 
that she was only commonplace before, compared 
to what she was now, so extraordinary was the im- 
provement wrought by rich fashionable attire. 

“But your criticisms are too full of brotherly 
partiality to be depended on, Washington. Other 
people will judge differently.’’ 

“Indeed they won’t. You'll see. There will 
never be a woman in Washington that can compare 
with you. You'll be famous within a fortnight, 
Laura. Everybody will want to know you. You 
wait—you’ll see.’’ 

Laura wished in her heart that the prophecy might 


1See publishers’ note, Volume I. 
i 


MARK TWAIN 


come true; and privately she even believed it might 
—for she had brought all the women whom she had 
seen since she left home under sharp inspection, 
and the result had not been unsatisfactory to her. 

During a week or two Washington drove about 
the city every day with her and familiarized her with 
all of its salient features. She was beginning to feel 
very much at home with the town itself, and she was 
also fast acquiring ease with the distinguished people 
she met at the Dilworthy table, and losing what lit- 
tle of country timidity she had brought with her 
from Hawkeye. She noticed with secret pleasure the 
little start of admiration that always manifested it- 
self in the faces of the guests when she entered the 
drawing-room arrayed in evening costume; she 
took comforting note of the fact that these guests 
directed a very liberal share of their conversation 
toward her; she observed with surprise, that famous 
statesmen and soldiers did not talk lke gods, asa 
general thing, but said rather commonplace things 
for the most part; and she was filled with gratifica- 
tion to discover that she, on the contrary, was 
making a good many shrewd speeches and now and 
then a really brilliant one, and, furthermore, that 
they were beginning to be repeated in social circles 
about the town. | 

Congress began its sittings, and every day or two 
Washington escorted her to the galleries set apart 
for lady members of the households of Senators and 
Representatives. Here was a larger field and a 
wider competition, but still she saw that many eyes 
were uplifted toward her face, and that first one 

2 


THE GILDED AGE 


person and then another called a neighbor’s atten- 
tion to her; she was not too dull to perceive that 
the speeches of some of the’ younger statesmen were 
delivered about as much and perhaps more at her 
than to the presiding officer; and she was not sorry 
to see that the dapper young Senator from Iowa 
came at once and stood in the open space before the 
President’s desk to exhibit his feet as soon as she 
entered the gallery, whereas she had early learned 
from common report that his usual custom was to 
prop them on his desk and enjoy them himself with 
a selfish disregard of other people’s longings. 

Invitations began to flow in upon her, and soon 
she was fairly ‘‘in society.’’ ‘‘Theseason”’ was now in 
full bloom, and the first select reception was at hand 
—that is to say, a reception confined to invited guests. 

Senator Dilworthy had become well convinced, 
by this time, that his judgment of the country-bred 
Missouri girl had not deceived him—it was plain 
that she was going to be a peerless missionary in the 
field of labor he designed her for, and therefore it 
would be perfectly safe and likewise judicious to 
send her forth well panoplied for her work. So he 
had added new and still richer costumes to her 
wardrobe, and assisted their attractions with costly 
jewelry—loans on the future land sale. 

The first select reception took place at a Cabinet 
Minister’s—or, rather, a Cabinet Secretary’s—man- 
sion. When Laura and the Senator arrived, about 
half-past nine or ten in the evening, the place was 
already pretty well crowded, and the white-gloved 
negro servant at the door was still receiving streams 

%) 


MARK TWAIN 


of guests. The drawing-rooms were brilliant with 
gaslight, and as hot as ovens. The host and hostess 
stood just within the door of entrance. Laura was 
presented, and then she passed on into the mael- 
strom of bejeweled and richly attired low-necked 
ladies and white-kid-gloved and steel-pen-coated 
gentlemen; and wherever she moved she was fol- 
lowed by a buzz of admiration that was grateful to 
all her senses—so grateful, indeed, that her white 
face was tinged and its beauty heightened by a per- 
ceptible suffusion of color. She caught such re- 
marks as, ‘‘Who is she?’ ‘‘Superb woman!” 
‘‘That is the new beauty from the West,”’ etc., etc. 

Whenever she halted, she was presently sur- 
rounded by Ministers, Generals, Congressmen, and 
all manner of aristocratic people. Introductions 
followed, and then the usual original question, ‘“How 
do you like Washington, Miss Hawkins?’ supple- 
mented by that other usual original question, “‘Is 
this your first visit?” 

These two exciting topics being exhausted, con- 
versation generally drifted into calmer channels, 
only to be interrupted at frequent intervals by new 
introductions and new inquiries as to how Laura 
liked the capital and whether it was her first visit or 
not. And thus for an hour or more the Duchess 
moved through the crush in a rapture of happiness, 
for her doubts were dead and gone, now—she knew 
she could conquer here. A familiar face appeared 
in the midst of the multitude, and Harry Brierly 
fought his difficult way to her side, his eyes shouting 
their gratification, so to speak: 

4 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Oh, this is a happiness! Tell me, my dear 
Miss Hawkins—”’ 

‘Sh! I know what you are going to ask. I do 
like Washington—I like it ever so much!” 

‘‘No, but I was going to ask—”’ 

‘‘Yes, I am coming to it, coming to it as fast as 
Ican. It 7s my first visit. I think you should know 
that yourself.” 

And straightway a wave of the crowd swept her 
beyond his reach. 

‘‘Now what can the girl mean? Of course she 
likes Washington—I’m not such a dummy as to 
have to ask her that. And as to its being her first 
visit, why! hang it, she knows that I knew it was. 
Does she think I have turned idiot? Curious girl, 
anyway. But how they do swarm about her! She 
is the reigning belle of Washington after this night. 
She’ll know five hundred of the heaviest guns in the 
town before this night’s nonsense is over. And this 
isn’t even the beginning. Just as I used to say— 
she'll be a card in the matter of—yes, sir! She 
shall turn the men’s heads and I'll turn the women’s! 
What a team that will be in politics here. I wouldn’t 
take a quarter of a million for what I can do in this 
present session—no, indeed, I wouldn’t. Now, 
here—I don’t altogether like this. That insignifi- 
cant secretary of legation is—why, she’s smiling on 
him as if he—and now on the Admiral! Now she’s 
illuminating that stuffy Congressman from Massa- 
chusetts — vulgar, ungrammatical shovel-maker— 
greasy knave of spades. I don’t like this sort of 
thing. She doesn’t appear to be much distressed 

5 


MARK TWAIN 


about me—she hasn’t looked this way once. All 
right, my bird of Paradise, if it suits you, go on. 
But I think I know your sex. I’ll go to smiling 
around a little, too, and see what effect that will have 
on you.”’ 

And he did ‘‘smile around a little,’ and got as 
near to her as he could to watch the effect, but the 
scheme was a failure—he could not get her atten- 
tion. She seemed wholly unconscious of him, and 
so he could not flirt with any spirit; he could only 
talk disjointedly; he could not keep his eyes on the 
charmers he talked to; he grew irritable, jealous, 
and very unhappy. He gave up his enterprise, 
leaned his shoulder against a fluted pilaster and 
pouted while he kept watch upon Laura’s every 
movement. His other shoulder stole the bloom 
from many a lovely cheek that brushed him in the 
surging crush, but he noted itnot. He was too busy 
cursing himself inwardly for being an egotistical im- 
becile. An hour ago he had thought to take this 
country lass under his protection and show her 
‘life’? and enjoy her wonder and delight—and here 
she. was, immersed in the marvel up to her eyes, 
and just a trifle more at home in it than he was 
himself. And now his angry comments ran on again: 

“Now she’s sweetening old Brother Balaam; and 
he—well, he is inviting her to the Congressional 
prayer-meeting, no doubt—hbetter let old Dilworthy 
alone to see that she doesn’t overlook that. And 
now its Splurge of New York; and now its Batters 
of New Hampshire—and now the Vice-President! 
Well, I may as well adjourn. I’ve got enough.”’ 

6 


THEsGILDED AGE 


But he hadn’t. He got as far as the door—and 
then struggled back to take one more look, hating 
himself all the while for his weakness. 

Toward midnight, when supper was announced, 
the crowd thronged to the supper-room, where a 
long table was decked out with what seemed a rare 
repast, but which consisted of things better calcu- 
lated to feast the eye than the appetite. The ladies 
were soon seated in files along the wall, and in 
groups here and there, and the colored waiters filled 
the plates and glasses, and the male guests moved 
hither and thither conveying them to the privileged 
Sex. 

Harry took an ice and stood up by the table with 
other gentlemen, and listened to the buzz of conver- 
sation while he ate. 

From these remarks he learned a good deal about 
Laura that was news to him. For instance, that she 
was of a distinguished Western family; that she was 
highly educated; that she was very rich and a great 
landed heiress; that she was not a professor of 
religion, and yet was a Christian in the truest and 
best sense of the word, for her whole heart was de- 
voted to the accomplishment of a great and noble 
enterprise—none other than the sacrificing of her 
landed estates to the uplifting of the down-trodden 
negro and the turning of his erring feet into the way 
of light and righteousness. Harry observed that as 
soon as one listener had absorbed the story he 
turned about and delivered it to his next neighbor, 
and the latter individual straightway passed it on. 
And thus he saw it travel the round of the gentle- 

7 


MARK TWAIN 


men and overflow rearward among the ladies. He 
could not trace it backward to its fountain-head, and 
so he could not tell who it was that started it. 

One thing annoyed Harry a great deal; and that 
was the reflection that he might have been in 
Washington days and days ago and thrown his 
fascinations about Laura with permanent effect while 
she was new and strange to the capitol, instead of 
dawdling in Philadelphia to no purpose. He feared 
he had ‘‘missed a trick,’’ as he expressed it. 

He only found one little opportunity of speaking 
again with Laura before the evening’s festivities 
ended, and then, for the first time in years, his airy 
self-complacency failed him, his tongue’s easy con- 
fidence forsook it in a great measure, and he was 
conscious of an unheroic timidity. He was glad to 
get away and find a place where he could despise 
himself in private and try to grow his clipped plumes 
again. 

When Laura reached home she was tired but 
exultant, and Senator Dilworthy was pleased and 
satisfied. He called Laura ‘‘my daughter,”’ next 
morning, and gave her some “‘pin money,” as he 
termed it, and she sent a hundred and fifty dollars 
of it to her mother and loaned a trifle to Colonel 
Sellers. Then the Senator had a long private con- 
ference with Laura, and unfolded certain plans of 
his for the good of the country, and religion, and 
the poor, and temperance, and showed her how she 
could assist him in developing these worthy and 
noble enterprises. 


CHAPTER II 
LAURA RECEIVES CALLS FROM THE ARISTOCRACIES 


—Itancan Ihduhomni eciyapi, Itancan Tohanokihi-eca eciyapt, 
Itancan Japiwaxte eciyapi, he hunkakewicaye cin etanhan 
otonwe kin caxtonpi; nakun Akicita Wicaxta-ceji-skuya, Akicita 
Anogite, Akicita Taku-kaxta— 

Joe richeste wifmen alle: Joat were in londe, 
and Jere hehere monnen dohtere. 

Jvere wes moni pal hende: on faire ]:a uolice. 
Joar was mochel honde: of manicunnes londe, 


for ech wende to beon: betere Joan olver. 
Layamon. 


AURA soon discovered that there were three 
distinct aristocracies in Washington. One of 
these (nicknamed the Antiques) consisted of culti- 
vated, high-bred old families who looked back with 
pride upon an ancestry that had been always great 
in the nation’s councils and its wars from the birth 
of the republic downward. Into this select circle it 
was difficult to gain admission. No. 2 was the 
aristocracy of the middle ground—of which, more 
anon. No. 3 lay beyond; of it we will say a word 
here. We will call it the Aristocracy of the Par- 
venus—as, indeed, the general public did. Official 
position, no matter how obtained, entitled a man to 
a place in it, and carried his family with him, no 
matter whence they sprang. Great wealth gave a 
9 


MARK TWAIN 


man a still higher and nobler place in it than did 
official position. If this wealth had been acquired 
by conspicuous ingenuity, with just a pleasant little 
spice of illegality about it, all the better. This 
aristocracy was ‘‘fast,’’ and not averse to ostenta- 
tion. The aristocracy of the Antiques ignored the 
aristocracy of the Parvenus; the Parvenus laughed 
at the Antiques (and secretly envied them). 

There were certain important ‘‘society’’ customs 
which one in Laura’s position needed to understand. 
For instance, when a lady of any prominence comes 
to one of our cities and takes up her residence, all the 
ladies of her grade favor her in turn with an initial 
call, giving their cards to the servant at the door by 
way of introduction. They come singly, sometimes; 
sometimes in couples—and always in elaborate 
full dress. They talk two minutes and a quarter and 
then go. If the lady receiving the call desires a 
further acquaintance, she must return the visit within 
two weeks; to neglect it beyond that time means 
“let the matter drop.’’ But if she does return the 
visit within two weeks, it then becomes the other 
party’s privilege to continue the acquaintance or 
drop it. She signifies her willingness to continue it 
by calling again any time within twelve months; 
after that, if the parties go on calling upon each 
other once a year, in our large cities, that is suffi- 
cient, and the acquaintanceship holds good. The 
thing goes along smoothly, now. The annual visits 
are made and returned with peaceful regularity and 
bland satisfaction, although it is not necessary that 
the two ladies shall actually see each other oftener 

Io 


THE GILDED AGE 


than once every few years. Their cards preserve 
the intimacy and keep the acquaintanceship intact. 

For instance, Mrs. A pays her annual visit, sits 
in her carriage and sends in her card with the lower 
right-hand corner turned down, which signifies that 
she has ‘“‘called in person’’; Mrs. B sends down 
word that she is ‘‘engaged”’ or ‘‘wishes to be ex- 
cused’’—or if she is a Parvenu and low-bred, she 
perhaps sends word that she is ‘‘not at home.” 
Very good; Mrs. A drives on happy and content. 
If Mrs. A’s daughter marries, or a child is born to 
the family, Mrs. B calls, sends in her card with the 
upper left-hand corner turned down, and then goes 
along about her affairs—for that inverted corner 
means ‘‘Congratulations.” If Mrs. B’s husband 
falls down-stairs and breaks his neck, Mrs. A calls, 
leaves her card with the upper right-hand corner 
turned down, and then takes her departure; this 
corner means ‘‘Condolence.”’ It is very necessary 
to get the corners right, else one may unintentionally 
condole with a friend on a wedding or congratulate 
her upon a funeral. If either lady is about to leave 
the city, she goes to the other’s house and leaves 
her card with ‘‘P. P. C.” engraved under the name 
—which signifies, ‘‘Pay Parting Call.”’ But enough 
of etiquette. Laura was early instructed in the mys- 
teries of society life by a competent mentor, and thus 
was preserved from troublesome mistakes. 

The first fashionable call she received from a mem- 
ber of the ancient nobility, otherwise the Antiques, 
was of a pattern with all she received from that limb 
of the aristocracy afterward. This call was paid by 

II 


MARK TWAIN 


Mrs. Major-General Fulke-Fulkerson and daughter. 
They drove up at one in the afternoon in a rather 
antiquated vehicle with a faded coat of arms on the 
panels, an aged white-wooled negro coachman on 
the box and a younger darky beside him—the foot- 
man. Both of these servants were dressed in dull- 
brown livery that had seen considerable service. 

The ladies entered the drawing-room in full char- 
acter; that is to say, with Elizabethan stateliness on 
the part of the dowager, and an easy grace and 
dignity on the part of the young lady that had a 
nameless something about it that suggested conscious 
superiority. ‘The dresses of both ladies were exceed- 
ingly rich as to material, but as notably modest as to 
colorandornament. All parties having seated them- 
selves, the dowager delivered herself of a remark 
that was not unusual in its form, and yet it came 
from her lips with the impressiveness of Scripture: 

‘“The weather has been unpropitious of late, Miss 
Hawkins.”’ : 

‘It has, indeed,’’ said Laura. ‘*‘The climate seems 
to be variable.”’ 

“It is its nature of old, here,’’ said the daughter 
—stating it apparently as a fact, only, and by her 
manner waving aside all personal responsibility on 
account of it. ‘‘Is it not so, mamma?” 

‘Quite so, my child. Do you like winter, Miss 
Hawkins?’ She said ‘‘like’’ as if she had an idea 
that its dictionary meaning was ‘‘approve of.” 

‘‘Not as well as summer—though I think all 
seasons have their charms.” 

“It is a very just remark. The general held 

I2 


THE GILDED AGE 


similar views. He considered snow in winter proper; 
sultriness in summer legitimate; frosts in the autumn 
the same, and rains in spring not objectionable. He 
was not an exacting man. And I call to mind now 
that he always admired thunder. You remember, 
child, your father always admired thunder?”’ 

“He adored it.” 

““No doubt it reminded him of battle,’’ said Laura. 

“Yes, I think perhaps it did. He had a great 
respect for Nature. He often said there was some- 
thing striking about the ocean. You remember his 
saying that, daughter?” 

“Yes, often, mother. I remember it very well.”’ 

‘‘And hurricanes. He took a great interest in 
hurricanes. And animals. Dogs, especially—hunt- 
ing-dogs. Also comets. I think we ali have our 
predilections. I think it is this that gives variety to 
our tastes.”’ Laura coincided with this view. ‘‘Do 
you find it hard and lonely to be so far from your 
home and friends, Miss Hawkins ?”’ 

‘I do find it depressing sometimes, but then there 
is so much about me here that is novel and interest- 
ing that my days are made up more of sunshine 
than shadow.” 

‘“Washington is not a dull city in the season,” 
said the young lady. ‘‘We have some very good 
society indeed, and one need not be at a loss for 
means to pass the time pleasantly. Are you fond 
of watering-places, Miss Hawkins?”’ 

‘““I have really had no experience of them, but I 
have always felt a strong desire to see something of 
fashionable watering-place life.’’ 

13 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘We of Washington are unfortunately situated 
in that respect,’’ said the dowager. ‘‘It is a tedious 
distance to Newport. But there is no help for it.” 

Laura said to herself, ‘“Long Branch and Cape 
May are nearer than Newport; doubtless these 
places are low; Til feel my way a little and see.’ 
Then she said aloud: 

“Why, I thought that Long Branch—’’ 

There was no need to “‘feel’’ any further—there 
was that in both faces before her which made that 
truth apparent. The dowager said: 

‘Nobody goes there, Miss Hawkins—at least, 
only persons of no position in society. And the 
President.’”’ She added that with tranquillity. 

‘‘Newport is damp, and cold, and windy, and 
excessively disagreeable,’ said the daughter, ‘‘but 
it is very select. One cannot be fastidious about 
minor matters when one has no choice.” 

The visit had spun out nearly three minutes, now. 
Both ladies rose with grave dignity, conferred upon 
Laura a formal invitation to call, and then retired 
from the conference. Laura remained in the draw- 
ing-room and left them to pilot themselves out of 
the house—an inhospitable thing, it seemed to her, 
but then she was following her instructions. She 
stood, steeped in reverie, awhile, and then she said: 

“TI think I could always enjoy icebergs—as 
scenery—but not as company.” 

Still, she knew these two people by reputation, 
and was aware that they were not icebergs when they 
were in their own waters and amid their legitimate 
surroundings, but on the contrary were people to 

14 


THE GILDED AGE 


be respected for their stainless characters and es- 
teemed for their social virtues and their benevolent 
impulses. She thought it a pity that they had to be 
such changed and dreary creatures on occasions of 
state. 

The first call Laura received from the other ex- 
tremity of the Washington aristocracy followed close 
upon the heels of the one we have just been de- 
scribing. The callers this time were the Hon. Mrs. 
Oliver Higgins, the Hon. Mrs. Patrique Oreillé 
(pronounced O-relay), Miss Bridget (pronounced 
Breezhay) Oreillé, Mrs. Peter Gashly, Miss Gashly, 
and Miss Emmeline Gashly. 

The three carriages arrived at the same moment 
from different directions. They were new and won- 
derfully shiny, and the brasses on the harness were 
highly polished and bore complicated monograms. 
There were showy coats of arms, too, with Latin 
mottoes. The coachman and footmen were clad in 
bright new livery, of striking colors, and they had 
black rosettes with shaving-brushes projecting above 
them, on the sides of their stove-pipe hats. 

When the visitors swept into the drawing-room 
they filled the place with a suffocating sweetness 
procured at the perfumer’s. ‘Their costumes, as to 
architecture, were the latest fashion intensified; they 
were rainbow-hued; they were hung with jewels— 
chiefly diamonds. It would have been plain to any 
eye that it had cost something to upholster these 
women. i 

The Hon. Mrs. Oliver Higgins was the wife ofa 
delegate from a distant territory—a gentleman who 

15 


MARK TWAIN 


had kept the principal ‘‘saloon,’”’ and sold the best 
whisky in the principal village in his wilderness, and 
so, of course, was recognized as the first man of his 
commonwealth and its fittest representative. He 
was a man of paramount influence at home, for he 
was public-spirited, he was chief of the fire depart- 
ment, he had an admirable command of profane 
language, and had killed several ‘‘parties.” His 
shirt-fronts were always immaculate; his boots 
daintly polished, and no man could lift a foot and 
fire a dead shot at a stray speck of dirt on it with a 
white handkerchief with a finer grace than he; his 
watch-chain weighed a pound; the gold in his finger 
ring was worth forty-five dollars; he wore a dia- 
mond cluster-pin, and he parted his hair behind. He 
had always been regarded as the most elegant gentle- 
man in his territory, and it was conceded by all that 
no man thereabouts was anywhere near his equal in 
the telling of an obscene story, except the venerable 
white-haired governor himself. The Hon. Higgins 
had not come to serve his country in Washington 
for nothing. ‘The appropriation which he had en- 
gineered through Congress for the maintenance of 
the Indians in his territory would have made all 
those savages rich if it had ever got to them. 

The Hon. Mrs. Higgins was a picturesque woman, 
and a fluent talker, and she held a tolerably high 
station among the Parvenus. Her English was fair 
enough, as a general thing—though, being of New 
York origin, she had the fashion peculiar to many 
natives of that city of pronouncing saw and law as if 
they were spelled sawr and lawr. 

16 


THE GILDED AGE 


Petroleum was the agent that had suddenly trans- 
formed the Gashlys from modest hard-working 
country village folk into ‘“‘loud” aristocrats and 
ornaments of the city. 

The Hon. Patrique Oreillé was a wealthy French- 
man from Cork. Not that he was wealthy when he 
first came from Cork, but just the reverse. When 
he first landed in New York with his wife, he had 
only halted at Castle Garden for a few minutes to 
receive and exhibit papers showing that he had re- 
sided in this country two years—and then he voted 
the Democratic ticket and went up-town to hunt a 
house. He found one, and then went to work as 
assistant to an architect and builder, carrying a hod 
all day and studying politics evenings. Industry 
and economy soon enabled him to start a low rum 
shop in a foul locality, and this gave him political 
influence. In our country it is always our first care 
to see that our people have the opportunity of 
voting for their choice of men to represent and 
govern them—we do not permit our great officials 
to appoint the little officials. We prefer to have so 
tremendous a power as that in our own hands. We 
hold it safest to elect our judges and everybody else. 
In our cities, the ward meetings elect delegates to 
the nominating conventions and instruct them whom 
to nominate. The publicans and their retainers rule 
the ward meetings (for everybody else hates the 
worry of politics and stays at home); the delegates 
from the ward meetings organize as a nominating 
convention and make up a list of candidates—one 
convention offering a Democratic and another a 

17 


MARK TWAIN 


Republican list of—incorruptibles; and then the 
great meek public come forward at the proper time 
and make unhampered choice and bless Heaven that 
they live in a free land where no form of despotism 
can ever intrude. 

Patrick O’Riley (as his name then stood) created 
friends and influence very fast, for he was always on 
hand at the police courts to give straw bail for his 
customers or establish an alibi for them in case they 
had been beating anybody to death on his premises. 
Consequently, he presently became a political leader, 
and was elected to a petty office under the city 
government. Out of a meager salary he soon saved 
money enough to open quite a stylish liquor saloon 
higher up-town, with a faro bank attached and 
plenty of capital to conduct it with. This gave him 
fame and great respectability. The position of 
alderman was forced upon him, and it was just the 
same as presenting him a gold-mine. He had fine 
horses and carriages, now, and closed up his whisky- 
mill. 

By and by he became a large contractor for city 
work, and was a bosom friend of the great and 
good William M. Weed himself, who had stolen 
twenty million dollars from the city and was a man 
so envied, so honored, so adored, indeed, that when 
the sheriff went to his office to arrest him as a felon, 
that sheriff blushed and apologized, and one of the 
illustrated papers made a picture of the scene and 
spoke of the matter in such a way as to show that 
the editor regretted:that the offense of an arrest had 
been offered to so exalted a personage as Mr. Weed. 

18 


THE GILDED AGE 


Mr. O’Riley furnished shingle-nails to the new 
courthouse at three thousand dollars a keg, and 
eighteen gross of 60-cent thermometers at fifteen 
hundred dollars a dozen; the comptroller and the 
board of audit passed the bills, and a mayor, who 
was simply ignorant but not criminal, signed them. 
When they were paid, Mr. O’Riley’s admirers gave 
him a solitaire diamond pin of the size of a filbert, 
in imitation of the liberality of Mr. Weed’s friends, 
and then Mr. O’Riley retired from active service 
and amused himself with buying real estate at 
enormous figures and holding it in other people’s 
names. By and by the newspapers came out with 
exposures and called Weed and O’Riley ‘‘thieves”’ 
—whereupon the people rose as one man (voting 
repeatedly) and elected the two gentlemen to their 
proper theater of action, the New York legislature. 
The newspapers clamored, and the courts proceeded 
to try the new legislators for their small irregularities. 
Our admirable jury system enabled the persecuted 
ex-officials to secure a jury of nine gentlemen from 
a neighboring asylum and three graduates from Sing 
sing, and presently they walked forth with char- 
acters vindicated. The legislature was called upon 
to spew them forth—a thing which the legislature 
declined to do. It was like asking children to 
repudiate their own father. It was a legislature of 
the modern pattern. 

Being now wealthy and distinguished, Mr. O’Riley, 
still bearing the legislative ‘‘Hon.” attached to his 
name (for titles never die in America, although we 
do take a republican pride in poking fun at such 

19 


MARK TWAIN 


trifles), sailed for Europe with his family. They 
traveled all about, turning their noses up at every- 
thing, and not finding it a difficult thing to do, 
either, because nature had originally given those 
features a cast in that direction; and finally they 
established themselves in Paris, that Paradise of 
Americans of their sort. They stayed there two 
years and learned to speak English with a foreign 
accent—not that it hadn’t always had a foreign ac- 
cent (which was indeed the case), but now the 
nature of it was changed. Finally they returned 
home and became ultra-fashionables. They landed 
here as the Hon. Patrique Oreillé and family, and so 
are known unto this day. 

Laura provided seats for her visitors, and they 
immediately launched forth into a breezy, sparkling 
conversation with that easy confidence which is to be 
found only among persons accustomed to high life. 

“‘T’ve been intending to call sooner, Miss Haw- 
kins,’’ said the Hon. Mrs. Oreillé, ‘‘but the weather’s 
been so horrid. How do you like Washington?” 

Laura liked it very well, indeed. 

Mrs. Gashly—‘‘Is it your first visit?” 

Yes, it was her first. 

All—‘‘Indeed ?”’ 

Mrs. Oreillé—‘I’m afraid you'll despise the 
weather, Miss Hawkins. It’s perfectly awful. It 
always is. I tell Mr. Oreillé I can’t and I won’t 
put up with any such a climate. If we were obliged 
to do it, I wouldn’t mind it; but we are not obliged 
to, and so I don’t see the use of it. Sometimes it’s 
real pitiful the way the children pine for Parry— 


20 


THE GILDED AGE 


don’t look so sad, Bridget, ma chére—poor child, 
she can’t hear Parry mentioned without getting the 
blues.”’ 

Mrs. Gashly—‘‘Well, I should think so, Mrs. 
Oreillé. A body lives in Paris, but a body only 
stays here. I dote on Paris; I’d druther scrimp 
along on ten thousand dollars a year there, than 
suffer and worry here on a real decent income.”’ 

Miss Gashly—‘‘ Well, then I wish you’d take us 
back, mother; I’m sure J hate this stoopid country 
enough, even if it 7s our dear native land.” 

Miss Emmeline Gashly—‘‘What, and leave poor 
Johnny Peterson behind?’ [An airy general laugh 
applauded this sally.] 

Miss Gashly—‘‘Sister, I should think you’d be 
ashamed of yourself!”’ 

Miss Emmeline—‘Oh, you needn’t ruffle your 
feathers so. I was only joking. He don’t mean 
anything by coming to the house every evening— 
only comes to see mother. Of course, that’s all!’’ 
[General laughter. | 

Miss G., prettily confused—‘‘Emmeline, how can 
you!”’ 

Mrs. G.—‘‘Let your sister alone, Emmeline. I 
never saw such a tease!” 

Mrs. Oreillé—‘‘ What lovely corals you have, Miss 
Hawkins! Just look at them, Bridget, dear. I’ve 
a great passion for corals—it’s a pity they’re getting 
a little common. I have some elegant ones—not as 
elegant as yours, though—but of course I don’t 
wear them now.” 

Laura—‘‘I suppose they are rather common, but 


21 


MARK TWAIN 


still I have a great affection for these, because they 
were given to me by a dear old friend of our family 
named Murphy. He was a very charming man, but 
very eccentric. We always supposed he was an 
Irishman, but after he got rich he went abroad for 
a year or two, and when he came back you would 
have been amused to see how interested he was in 
a potato. He asked what it was! Now you know 
that when Providence shapes a mouth especially for 
the accommodation of a potato you can detect that 
fact at a glance when that mouth is in repose—foreign 
travel can never remove that sign. But he was a 
very delightful gentleman, and his little foible did 
not hurt him at all. We all have our shams—I 
suppose there is a sham somewhere about every 
individual, if we could manage to ferret it out. I 
would so like to go to France. I suppose our 
society here compares very favorably with French 
society, does it not, Mrs. Oreillé?”’ 

Mrs. O.—'‘Not by any means, Miss Hawkins! 
French society is much more elegant—much more so.”’ 

Laura—‘‘T am sorry to hear that. I suppose ours 
has deteriorated of late.”’ 

Mrs. O.—‘‘Very much indeed. There are people 
in society here that have really no more money to 
live on than what some of us pay for servant hire. 
still, I won’t say but what some of them are very 
good people—and respectable, too.” 

Laura—‘‘The old families seem to be holding 
themselves aloof, from what I hear. I suppose you 
seldom meet in society now the people you used 
to be familiar with twelve or fifteen years ago?” 

22 


THE *GILDED® AGE 


Mrs. O.—‘‘Oh, no—hardly ever.”’ 

Mr. O’Riley kept his first rum-mill and protected 
his customers from the law in those days, and this 
turn of the conversation was rather uncomfortable to 
madame than otherwise. 

Hon. Mrs. Higgins—‘‘Is Frangois’s health good 
now, Mrs. Oreillé?”’ 

Mrs. O. (Thankful for the intervention)—‘‘ Not very. 
A body couldn’t expect it. He was always delicate 
—especially his lungs—and this odious climate 
tells on him strong, now, after Parry, which is so 
mild.”’ 

Mrs. H.—‘‘T should think so. Husband says 
Percy’ll die if he don’t have a change; and so I’m 
going to swap round a little and see what can be 
done. I saw a lady from Florida last week, and she 
recommended Key West. I told her Percy couldn’t 
abide winds, as he was threatened with a pulmonary 
affection, and then she said try St. Augustine. It’s 
an awful distance—ten or twelve hundred mile, they 
say—but then in a case of this kind a body can’t 
stand back for trouble, you know.”’ 

Mgrs. O.— No, ‘of course, that’seso. If Frafigois 
don’t get better soon we’ve got to look out for some 
other place, or else Europe. We've thought some 
of the Hot Springs, but I don’t know. It’s a great 
responsibility and a body wants to go cautious. Is 
Hildebrand about again, Mrs. Gashly?”’ 

Mrs. G.—‘‘Yes, but that’s about all. It was 
indigestion, you know, and it looks as if it was 
chronic. And you know I do dread dyspepsia. 
We've all been worried a good deal about him. The 

23 


MARK TWAIN 


doctor recommended baked apple and spoiled meat, 
and I think it done him good. It’s about the only 
thing that will stay on his stomach nowadays. We 
have Dr. Shovel now. Who’s your doctor, Mrs. 
Higgins?” 

Mrs. H.—‘‘Well, we had Dr. Spooner a good 
while, but he runs so much to emetics, which I think 
are weakening, that we changed off and took Dr. 
Leathers. We like him very much. He has a fine 
European reputation, too. The first thing he sug- 
gested for Percy was to have him taken out in the 
back yard for an airing, every afternoon, with noth- 
ing at all on.” | 

Mrs. O. and Mrs. G.—‘‘ What!” 

Mrs. H.—‘‘As true as I’m sitting here. And it 
actually helped him for two or three days; it did 
indeed. But after that the doctor said it seemed 
to be too severe, and so he has fell back on hot foot- 
baths at night and cold showers in the morning. 
But I don’t think there can be any good sound help 
for him in such a climate as this. I believe we are 
going to lose him if we don’t make a change.” 

Mrs. O.—‘‘I suppose you heard of the fright we 
had two weeks ago last Saturday’? No? Why, 
that is strange—but come to remember, you've all 
been away to Richmond. Francois tumbled from 
the skylight in the second-story hall clean down to 
the first floor—’’ 

Everybody—‘‘ Mercy 

Mrs. O.—‘‘Yes indeed—and broke two of his 
ribs—”’ 

Everybody—‘‘ What!’ 


1”? 


24 


THE GILDED AGE 


Mrs. O.—‘Just as true as you live. First we 
thought he must be injuredinternally. It was fifteen 
minutes past eight in the evening. Of course we 
were all distracted in a moment—everybody was 
flying everywhere, and nobody doing anything worth 
anything. By and by I flung out next door and 
dragged in Dr. Sprague, president of the Medical 
University—no time to go for our own doctor, of 
course—and the minute he saw Francois he said, 
‘Send for your own physician, madam’—said it as 
cross as a bear, too, and turned right on his heel 
and cleared out without doing a thing!” 

Everybody—‘* The mean, contemptible brute!” 

Mrs. O.—‘‘Well you may say it. I was nearly 
out of my wits by this time. But we hurried off the 
servants after our own doctor and telegraphed 
mother—she was in New York and rushed down on 
the first train; and when the doctor got there, lo 
and behold you he found Francois had broke one of 
his legs, too!”’ 

Everybody—‘‘ Goodness!” 

Mrs. O.—'‘Yes. So he set his leg and bandaged 
it up, and fixed his ribs and gave him a dose of 
something to quiet down his excitement and put 
him to sleep—poor thing, he was trembling and 
frightened to death, and it was pitiful to see him. 
We had him in my bed—Mr. Oreillé slept in the 
guest-room and I laid down beside Francois—but 
not to sleep—bless you no. Bridget and I set up 
all night, and the doctor stayed till two in the 
morning, bless his old heart. When mother got 
there she was so used up with anxiety that she had 

25 


MARK TWAIN 


to go to bed and have the doctor; but when she 
found that Francois was not in immediate danger she 
rallied, and by night she was able to take a watch 
herself. Well, for three days and nights we three 
never left that bedside only to take an hour’s nap at 
atime. And then the doctor said Francois was out 
of danger, and if ever there was a thankful set, in 
this world, it was us.” 

Laura’s respect for these women had augmented 
during this conversation, naturally enough; affection 
and devotion are qualities that are able to adorn 
and render beautiful a character that is otherwise 
unattractive, and even repulsive. 

Mrs. Gashly—‘‘I do believe I should ’a’ died if I 
had been in your place, Mrs. Oreillé. The time 
Hildebrand was so low with the pneumonia Emme- 
line and me were all alone with him most of the time, 
and we never took a minute’s sleep for as much as 
two days and nights. It was at Newport, and we 
wouldn’t trust hired nurses. One afternoon he had 
a fit, and jumped up and run out on the portico of 
the hotel with nothing in the world on and the wind 
a-blowing like ice and we after him scared to death; 
and when the ladies and gentlemen saw that he had 
a fit, every lady scattered for her room and not a 
gentleman lifted his hand to help—the wretches! 
Well, after that his life hung by a thread for as 
much as ten days, and the minute he was out of 
danger Emmeline and me just went to bed sick and 
worn out. J never want to pass through such a 
time again. Poor dear Francois—which leg did 
he break, Mrs. Oreillé?”’ 

26 


THE GILDED AGE 


Mrs. O.—‘‘It was his right-hand hind leg. Jump 
down, Francois dear, and show the ladies what a 
cruel limp you’ve got yet.”’ 

Francois demurred, but being coaxed and deliv- 
ered gently upon the floor, he performed very satis- 
factorily, with his ‘‘right-hand hind leg’’ in the air. 
All were affected—even Laura—but hers was an 
affection of the stomach. The country-bred girl 
had not suspected that the little whining ten-ounce 
black-and-tan reptile, clad in a red embroidered 
pygmy blanket and reposing in Mrs. Oreillé’s lap all 
through the visit, was the individual whose sufferings 
had been stirring the dormant generosities of her 
nature. She said: 

‘“‘Poor little creature! You might have lost him!” 

Mrs. O.—“‘Oh pray don’t mention it, Miss Haw- 
kins—it gives me such a turn!’ 

Laura—'‘And Hildebrand and Percy—are they— 
are they like this one?”’ 

Mrs. G.—‘‘No, Hilly has considerable Skye blood 
in him, I believe.”’ 

Mrs. H:—‘'Percy’s the same, only he is two 
months and ten days older and has his ears cropped. 
His father, Martin Farquhar Tupper, was sickly, and 
died young, but he was the sweetest disposition. 
His mother had heart disease, but was very gentle 
and resigned, and a wonderful ratter.’’? 


1As impossible and exasperating as this conversation may sound 
to a person who is not an idiot, it is scarcely in any respect an 
exaggeration of one which one of us actually listened to in an 
American drawing-room; otherwise we could not venture to put 
such a chapter into a book which professes to deal with social 
possibilities THE AUTHORS. 


27 


MARK TWAIN 


So carried away had the visitors become by their 
interest attaching to this discussion of family mat- 
ters, that their stay had been prolonged to a very 
improper and unfashionable length; but they sud- 
denly recollected themselves now and took their 
departure. 

Laura’s scorn was boundless. The more she 
thought of these people and their extraordinary talk, 
the more offensive they seemed to her; and yet she 
confessed that if one must choose between the two 
extreme aristocracies it might be best, on the whole, 
looking at things from a strictly business point of 
view, to herd with the Parvenus; she was in Wash- 
ington solely to compass a certain matter and to do 
it at any cost, and these people might be useful to 
her, while it was plain that her purposes and her 
schemes for pushing them would not find favor in 
the eyes of the Antiques. If it came to choice— 
and it might come to that, sooner or later—she 
believed she could come to a decision without much 
difficulty or many pangs. 

But the best aristocracy of the three Washington 
castes, and really the most powerful, by far, was 
that of the Middle Ground. It was made up of the 
families of public men from nearly every state in the 
Union—men who held positions in both the execu- 
tive and legislative branches of the government, and 
whose characters had been for years blemishless, 
both at home and at the capital. These gentlemen 
and their households were unostentatious people; 
they were educated and refined; they troubled 
themselves but little about the two other orders of 

28 


Tie GrLDE® AGE 


nobility, but moved serenely in their wide orbit, con- 
fident in their own strength and well aware of the 
potency of their influence. They had no trouble- 
some appearances to keep up, no rivalries which they 
cared to distress themselves about, no jealousies to 
fret over. They could afford to mind their own 
affairs and leave other combinations to do the same 
or do otherwise, just as they chose. They were 
people who were beyond reproach, and that was 
sufficient. 

Senator Dilworthy never came into collision with 
any of these factions. He labored for them all 
and with them all. He said that all men were 
brethren and all were entitled to the honest, un- 
selfish help and countenance of a Christian laborer 
in the public vineyard. 

Laura concluded, after reflection, to let circum- 
stances determine the course it might be best for her 
to pursue as regarded the several aristocracies. 

Now, it might occur to the reader that perhaps 
Laura had been somewhat rudely suggestive in her 
remarks to Mrs. Oreillé when the subject of corals 
was under discussion, but it did not occur to Laura 
herself. She was not a person of exaggerated refine- 
ment; indeed, the society and the influences that 
had formed her character had not been of a nature 
calculated to make her so; she thought that ‘‘give 
and take was fair play,’’ and that to parry an offen- 
sive thrust with a sarcasm was a neat and legitimate 
thing to do. She sometimes talked to people in 
a way which some ladies would consider actually 
shocking; but Laura rather prided herself upon 

29 


MARK TWAIN 


some of her exploits of that character. We are 
sorry we cannot make her a faultless heroine; but 
we cannot, for the reason that she was human. 

She considered herself a superior conversationist. 
Long ago, when the possibility had first been brought 
before her mind that some day she might move in 
Washington society, she had recognized the fact that 
practised conversational powers would be a necessary 
weapon in that field; she had also recognized the 
fact that since her dealings there must be mainly 
with men, and men whom she supposed to be ex- 
ceptionally cultivated and able, she would need 
heavier shot in her magazine than mere brilliant 
““society’’ nothings; whereupon she had at once 
entered upon a tireless and elaborate course of read- 
ing, and had never since ceased to devote every 
unoccupied moment to this sort of preparation. 
Having now acquired a happy smattering of various 
information, she used it with good effect—she passed 
for a singularly well-informed woman in Washington. 
The quality of her literary tastes had necessarily 
undergone constant improvement under this regi- 
men, and as necessarily, also, the quality of her 
language had improved, though it cannot be denied 
that now and then her former condition of life be- 
trayed itself in just perceptible inelegancies of ex- 
pression and lapses of grammar. 


CHAPTER III 


LAURA IN THE LOBBY 
Eet Jomfru Haar drager sterkere end ti Par Oxen. 


HEN Laura had been in Washington three 
months, she was still the same person, in one 
respect, that she was when she first arrived there— 
that is to say, she still bore the name of Laura 
Hawkins. Otherwise she was perceptibly changed. 
She had arrived in a state of grievous uncertainty 
as to what manner of woman she was, physically 
and intellectually, as compared with Eastern women; 
she was well satisfied, now, that her beauty was con- 
fessed, her mind a grade above the average, and her 
powers of fascination rather extraordinary. So she 
was at ease upon those points. When she arrived, 
she was possessed of habits of economy and not pos- 
sessed of money; now she dressed elaborately, gave 
but little thought to the cost of things, and was very 
well fortified financially. She kept her mother and 
Washington freely supplied with money, and did the 
same by Colonel Sellers—who always insisted upon 
giving his note for loans—with interest: he was 
rigid upon that; she must take interest; and one of 
the Colonel’s greatest satisfactions was to go over 
his accounts and note what a handsome sum this 
accruing interest amounted to, and what a comfort- 
31 


MARK TWAIN 


able though modest support it would yield Laura in 
case reverses should overtake her. In truth, he 
could not help feeling that he was an efficient shield 
for her against poverty; and so, if her expensive ways 
ever troubled him for a brief moment, he presently 
dismissed the thought and said to himself, ‘‘Let her 
go on—even if she loses everything she is still safe 
—this interest will always afford her a good easy 
income.”’ 

Laura was on excellent terms with a great many 
members of Congress, and there was an undercurrent 
of suspicion in some quarters that she was one of 
that detested class known as “‘lobbyists”’; but what 
belle could escape slander in such a city? Fair- 
minded people declined to condemn her on mere 
suspicion, and so the injurious talk made no very 
damaging headway. She was very gay, now, and 
very celebrated, and she might well expect to be as- 
sailed by many kinds of gossip. She was growing 
used to celebrity, and could already sit calm and 
seemingly unconscious, under the fire of fifty lor- 
gnettes in a theater, or even overhear the low voice 
‘“That’s she!’ as she passed along the street with- 
out betraying annoyance. 

The whole air was full of a vague vast scheme 
which was to eventuate in filling Laura’s pockets 
with millions of money; some had one idea of the 
scheme, and some another, but nobody had any 
exact knowledge upon the subject. All that any one 
felt sure about was, that Laura’s landed estates were 
princely in value and extent, and that the govern- 
“ment was anxious to get hold of them for public 

3? 


THE GILDED AGE 


purposes, and that Laura was willing to make the 
sale, but not at all anxious about the matter and not 
at all in a hurry. It was whispered that Senator 
Dilworthy was a stumbling-block in the way of an 
immediate sale, because he was resolved that the 
government should not have the lands, except with 
the understanding that they should be devoted to 
the uplifting of the negro race; Laura did not care 
what they were devoted to, it was said (a world of 
very different gossip to the contrary notwithstand- 
ing), but there were several other heirs, and they 
would be guided entirely by the Senator’s wishes; 
and, finally, many people averred that while it would 
be easy to sell the lands to the government for the 
benefit of the negro, by resorting to the usual 
methods of influencing votes, Senator Dilworthy was 
unwilling to have so noble a charity sullied by any 
taint of corruption—he was resolved that not a vote 
should be bought. Nobody could get anything defi- 
nite from Laura about these matters, and so gossip 
had to feed itself chiefly upon guesses. But the 
effect of it all was, that Laura was considered to be 
very wealthy and likely to be vastly more so in a 
little while. Consequently, she was much courted 
and as much envied. Her wealth attracted many 
suitors. Perhaps they came to worship her riches, 
but they remained to worship her. Some of the 
noblest men of the time succumbed to her fascina- 
tions. She frowned upon no lover when he made 
his first advances, but by and by, when he was hope- 
lessly enthralled, he learned from her own lips that 
she had formed a resolution never to marry. Then 
33 


MARK TWAIN 


he would go away hating and cursing the whole sex, 
and she would calmly add his scalp to her string, 
while she mused upon the bitter day that Colonel 
Selby trampled her love and her pride in the dust. 
In time it came to be said that her way was paved 
with broken hearts. 

Poor Washington gradually woke up to the fact 
that he, too, was an intellectual marvel as well as his 
gifted sister. He could not conceive how it had 
come about (it did not occur to him that the gossip 
about his family’s great wealth had anything to do 
with it). He could not account for it by any proc- 
ess of reasoning, and was simply obliged to accept 
the fact and give up trying to solve the riddle. He 
found himself dragged into society and courted, 
wondered at and envied very much as if he were one 
of those foreign barbers who flit over here now and 
then with a self-conferred title of nobility and marry 
some rich fool’s absurd daughter. Sometimes at a 
dinner-party or a reception he would find himself the 
center of interest, and feel unutterably uncomfortable 
in the discovery. Being obliged to say something, 
he would mine his brain and put in a blast, and when 
the smoke and flying debris had cleared away the re- 
sult would be what seemed to him but a poor little 
intellectual clod of dirt or two, and then he would be 
astonished to see everybody as lost in admiration as 
if he had brought up a ton or two of virgin gold. 
Every remark he made delighted his hearers and 
compelled their applause; he overheard people say 
he was exceedingly bright—they were chiefly mam- 
mas and marriageable young ladies. He found that 

34 


THE GILDED AGE 


some of his good things were being repeated about 
the town. Whenever he heard of an instance of this 
kind, he would keep that particular remark in mind 
and analyze it at home in private. At first he could 
not see that the remark was anything better than a 
parrot might originate; but by and by he began to 
feel that perhaps he underrated his powers; and 
after that he used to analyze his good things with a 
deal of comfort, and find in them a brilliancy which 
would have been unapparent to him in earlier days 
—and then he would make a note of that good thing 
and say it again the first time he found himself in a 
new company. Presently he had saved up quite a 
repertoire of brilliancies; and after that he confined 
himself to repeating these and ceased to originate 
any more, lest he might injure his reputation by an 
unlucky effort. 

He was constantly having young ladies thrust upon 
his notice at receptions, or left upon his hands at 
parties, and in time he began to feel that he was 
being deliberately persecuted in this way; and after 
that he could not enjoy society because of his con- 
stant dread of these female ambushes and surprises. 
He was distressed to find that nearly every time 
he showed a young lady a polite attention he was 
straightway reported to be engaged to her; and as 
some of these reports got into the newspapers occa- 
sionally, he had to keep writing to Louise that they 
were lies and she must believe in him and not mind 
them or allow them to grieve her. 

Washington was as much in the dark as anybody 
with regard to the great wealth that was hovering in 

35 


MARK TWAIN 


the air and seemingly on the point of tumbling into 
the family pocket. Laura would give him no satis- 
faction. All she would say, was: 

‘Wait. Be patient. You will see.” 

‘*But will it be soon, Laura?” 

‘It will not be very long, I think.”’ 

“But what makes you think so?” 

‘“‘T have reasons—and good ones. Just wait, and 
be patient.”’ 

‘‘But is it going to be as much as people say it is?”’ 

‘“What do they say it is?” 

‘‘Oh, ever somuch. Mitlions!’’ 

‘‘Yes, it will be a great sum.” 

‘But how great, Laura? Will it be millions?” 

“Yes, you may call it that. Yes, it will be mill- 
ions. There, now—does that satisfy you?”’ 

“Splendid! I can wait. I can wait patiently— 
ever so patiently. Once I was near selling the land 
for twenty thousand dollars; once for thirty thou- 
sand dollars; once after that for seven thousand 
dollars; and once for forty thousand dollars—but 
something always told me not to doit. What a fool 
I would have been to sell it for such a beggarly 
trifle! It is the land that’s to bring the money, isn’t 
it, Laura? You can tell me that much, can’t you?” 

‘“Yes, I don’t mind saying that much. It zs the 
land. But mind—don’t ever hint that you got it 
from me. Don’t mention me in the matter at all, 
‘Washington.”’ 

‘‘All right—I won’t. Millions! Isn’t it splendid! 
I mean to look around for a building lot; a lot with 
fine ornamental shrubbery and all that sort of thing. 

36 


tree “CciLeeyD AGE 


I will do it to-day. And I might as well see an 
architect, too, and get him to go to work at a plan 
for a house. JI don’t intend to spare any expense; 
I mean to have the noblest house that money can 
build.”” Then after a pause—he did not notice 
Laura’s smiles—‘‘Laura, would you lay the main 
hall in encaustic tiles, or just in fancy patterns of 
hard wood?” 

Laura laughed a good old-fashioned laugh that 
had more of her former natural self about it than 
any sound that had issued from her mouth in many 
weeks. She said: 

“You don’t change, Washington. You still begin 
to squander a fortune right and left the instant you 
hear of it in the distance; you never wait till the 
foremost dollar of it arrives within a hundred miles 
of you’’—and she kissed her brother good-by and 
left him weltering in his dreams, so to speak. 

He got up and walked the floor feverishly during 
two hours; and when he sat down he had married 
Louise, built a house, reared a family, married 
them off, spent upward of eight hundred thousand 
dollars on mere luxuries, and died worth twelve 
millions. 


CHAPTER IV 


HOW MAJORITIES ARE SECURED 


“‘Mi-x-in tzakcaamah, x-in tzakcolobch chirech nu zaki caam, 
nu zaki colo. ... nu chincu, nu galgab, nu zalmet”... 
Rabinal-Achi. 


Chascus hom a sas palmas deves se meteys viradas. 


AURA went down-stairs, knocked at the study 
door, and entered, scarcely waiting for the re- 
sponse. Senator Dilworthy was alone—with an 
open Bible in his hand, upside down. Laura smiled, 
and said, forgetting her acquired correctness of 
speech: 

“‘It is only me.”’ 

‘*Ah, come in, sit down,’’ and the Senator closed 
the book and laid it down. ‘‘I wanted to see you. 
Time to report progress from the committee of the 
whole,’’ and the Senator beamed with his own 
Congressional wit. 

““In the committee of the whole things are work- 
ing very well. We have made ever so much prog- 
ress in a week. I believe that you and I together 
could run this government beautifully, uncle.” 

The Senator beamed again. He liked to be called 
“‘uncle”’ by this beautiful woman. 

“‘Did you see Hopperson last night after the Con- 
gressional prayer-meeting?”’ 

38 


THE GILDED AGE 


nives. He camer He’s a kind of—” 

‘Eh? he is one of my friends, Laura. He’s a 
fine man, a very fine man. I don’t know any man 
in Congress I’d sooner go to for help in any Chris- 
tian work. What did he say?” 

‘‘Oh, he beat around a little. He said he should 
like to help the negro, his heart went out to the 
negro, and all that—plenty of them say that—but 
he was a little afraid of the Tennessee Land bill; if 
Senator Dilworthy wasn’t in it, he should suspect 
there was a fraud on the government.” 

‘“He said that, did he?” 

‘“Yes. And he said he felt he couldn’t vote for 
it. He was shy.” 

‘‘Not shy, child—cautious. He’s a very cautious 
man. I have been with him a great deal on confer- 
ence committees. He wants reasons, good ones. 
Didn’t you show him he was in error about the 
bill?”’ 

‘‘T did. I went over the whole thing. I had to 
tell him some of the side arrangements, some of 
the—’’ 

‘You didn’t mention me?” 

“Oh, no. I told him you were daft about the 
negro and the philanthropy part of it, as you are.” 

“Daft is a little strong, Laura. But you know 
that I wouldn’t touch this bill if it were not for the 
public good, and for the good of the colored race, 
much as I am interested in the heirs of this prop- 
erty, and would like to have them succeed.”’ 

Laura looked a little incredulous, and the Senator 
proceeded. 

39 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Don’t misunderstand me, Laura. I don’t deny 
that it is for the interest of all of us that this bill 
should go through, and it will. I have no conceal- 
ments from you. But I have one principle in my 
public life, which I should like you to keep in mind; 
it has always been my guide. I never push a private 
interest if it is not justified and ennobled by some 
larger public good. I doubt if a Christian would be 
justified in working for his own salvation if it was not 
to aid in the salvation of his fellow-men.”’ 

The Senator spoke with feeling, and then added: 

‘‘T hope you showed Hopperson that our motives 
were pure?” 

‘Yes, and he seemed to have a new light on the 
measure. I think he will vote for it.” 

‘“‘T hope so; his name will give tone and strength 
to it. I knew you would only have to show him 
that it was just and pure, in order to secure his 
cordial support.” 

“T think I convinced him. Yes, I am perfectly 
sure he will vote right now.”’ 

‘““That’s good, that’s good,” said the Senator, 
smiling and rubbing his hands. ‘‘Is there any- 


thing more?”’ 
‘You'll find some changes in that, I guess, ’*hand- 
ing the Senator a printed list of names. ‘‘Those 


checked off are all right.” 

“Ah—’m—’m,” running his eye down the list. 
‘‘That’s encouraging. What is the ‘C’ before some 
of the names, and the ‘B. B.’?”’ 

‘Those are my private marks. That ‘C’ stands 
for ‘convinced,’ with argument. The ‘B. B.’ is a 

40 


tHe GILDED AGE 


general sign for a relative. You see it stands before 
three of the Hon. Committee. I expect to see the 
chairman of the committee to-day, Mr. Buckstone.”’ 

‘“‘So you must; he ought to be seen without any 
delay. Buckstone is a worldly sort of a fellow, but 
he has charitable impulses. If we secure him we shall 
have a favorable report by the committee, and it will 
be a great thing to be able to state that fact quietly 
where it will do good.”’ 

‘‘Oh, I saw Senator Balloon.”’ 

‘He will help us, I suppose? Balloon is a whole- 
hearted fellow. I can’t help loving that man, for all 
his drollery and waggishness. He puts on an air of 
levity sometimes, but there ain’t a man in the Senate 
knows the Scriptures as he does. He did not make 
any objections?” ‘ 

‘‘Not exactly; he said—shall I tell you what he 
said?’ asked Laura, glancing furtively at him. 

“‘Certainly.”’ 

‘‘He said he had no doubt it was a good thing; if 
Senator Dilworthy was in it, it would pay to look 
into it.” 

The Senator laughed, but rather feebly, and said, 
‘‘Balloon is always full of his jokes.” 

‘“‘T explained it to him. He said it was all right, 
he only wanted a word with you,” continued Laura. 
‘‘He is a handsome old gentleman, and he is gal- 
lant for an old man.” 

‘‘My daughter,” said the Senator, with a grave 
look, ‘‘I trust there was nothing free in his manner?”’ 

‘“‘Free?’’ repeated Laura, with indignation in her 
face. ‘“‘With me!”’ 

41 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“There, there, child. I meant nothing; Balloon 
talks a little freely sometimes, with men. But he is 
right at heart. His term expires next year and I 
fear we shall lose him.”’ 

‘‘He seemed to be packing the day I was there. 
His rooms were full of dry-goods boxes, into which 
his servant was crowding all manner of old clothes 
and stuff. I suppose he will paint ‘Pub. Docs’ on 
them and frank them home. That’s good economy, 
detet ttn” 

“Yes, yes; but, child, all Congressmen do that. 
It may not be strictly honest; indeed, it is not unless 
he had some public documents mixed in with the 
clothes.”’ 

“It’s a funny world. Good-by, uncle. I’m go- 
ing to see that chairman.” 

And humming a cheery opera air, she departed to 
her room to dress for going out. Before she did 
that, however, she took out her note-book and was 
soon deep in its contents, marking, dashing, erasing, 
figuring, and talking to herself. 

“Free! I wonder what Dilworthy does think of 
me, anyway’? One...two...eight... seventeen 
... twenty-one,...’m’m... it takes a heap for a 
majority. Wouldn’t Dilworthy open his eyes if he 
knew some of the things Balloon did say to me. 


There . . . Hopperson’s influence ought to count 
twenty ... the sanctimonious old curmudgeon. Son- 
in-law .. . sinecure in the negro institution. ... That 
about gauges him. ...The three committeemen... 


sons-in-law. Nothing like a son-in-law here in 
Washington... or a brother-in-law. ... And every- 
42 


TRE’ GILDED AGE 


body has ’em.... Let’s see. . . sixty-one... with 
places; .. . twenty-five .. . persuaded—it is getting 
on; ...we'll have two-thirds of Congress in time. 


.. . Dilworthy must surely know I understand him. 
Uncle Dilworthy ... Uncle Balloon! ... Tells very 
amusing stories ... when ladies are not present. . - 
ichowldwihimicso...’m...'m. LHightyefivess. - 
There. I must find that chairman. Queer... . 


Buckstone acts. .. . Seemed to be in love.... I was 
sure of it. He promised to come here... and he’ 
hasn’t....Strange. Verystrange....I must chance 


to meet him to-day.”’ 

Laura dressed and went out, thinking she was per- 
haps too early for Mr. Buckstone to come from the 
house, but as he lodged near the bookstore she 
would drop in there and keep a lookout for him. 

While Laura is on her errand to find Mr. Buck- 
stone, it may not be out of the way to remark that 
she knew quite as much of Washington life as Sen- 
ator Dilworthy gave her credit for, and more than 
she thought proper to tell him. She was acquainted 
by this time with a good many of the young fellows 
of Newspaper Row, and exchanged gossip with them 
to their mutual advantage. 

They were always talking in the Row, everlastingly 
gossiping, bantering, and sarcastically praising things, 
and going on in a style which was a curious com- 
mingling of earnest and persiflage. Colonel Sellers 
liked this talk amazingly, though he was sometimes 
a little at sea in it—and perhaps that didn’t lessen 
the relish of the conversation to the correspondents. 

It seems that they had got hold of the dry-goods- 

43 


MARK TWAIN 


box packing story about Balloon, one day, and were 
talking it over when the Colonel came in. The 
Colonel wanted to know all about it, and Hicks told 
him. And then Hicks went on, with a serious air: 

‘‘Colonel, if you register a letter, it means that it 
is of value, doesn’t it? And if you pay fifteen cents 
for registering it, the government will have to take 
extra care of it and even pay you back its full value 
if it is lost. Isn’t that so?” 

‘‘Yes. I suppose it’s so.”’ 

‘‘Well, Senator Balloon put fifteen cents’ worth of 
stamps on each of those seven huge boxes of old 
clothes, and shipped that ton of second-hand rub- 
bish, old boots and pantaloons and what not through 
the mails as registered matter! It was an ingenious 
thing and it had a genuine touch of humor about it, 
too. I think there is more real talent among our 
public men of to-day than there was among those of 
old times—a far more fertile fancy, a much happier 
ingenuity. Now, Colonel, can you picture Jeffer- 
son, or Washington, or John Adams franking their 
wardrobes through the mails and adding the facetious 
idea of making the government responsible for the 
cargo for the sum of one dollar and five cents? 
Statesmen were dull creatures in those days. I 
have a much greater admiration for Senator Balloon.” 

‘‘Yes, Balloon is a man of parts, there is no deny- 
ine it. 

‘“‘T think so. He is spoken of for the post of 
Minister to China, or Austria, and I hope will be 
appointed. What we want abroad is good examples 
of the national character. John Jay and Benjamin 

44 


THE GILDED AGE 


Franklin were well enough in their day, but the nation 
has made progress since then. Balloon is a man we 
know and can depend on to be true to—himself.”’ 

‘‘Yes, and Balloon has had a good deal of public 
experience. He is an old friend of mine. He was 
governor of one of the territories awhile, and was 
very satisfactory.” 

‘‘Indeed, he was. He was ex-officio Indian agent, 
too. Many a man would have taken the Indian 
appropriation and devoted the money to feeding 
and clothing the helpless savages, whose land had 
been taken from them by the white man in the 
interests of civilization; but Balloon knew their 
needs better. He built a government sawmill on the 
reservation with the money, and the lumber sold 
for enormous prices—a. relative of his did all the 
work free of charge—that is to say, he charged 
nothing more than the lumber would bring.”’ 

“But the poor Injuns—not that I care much for 
Injuns—what did he do for them?”’ 

““Gave them the outside slabs to fence in the 
reservation with. Governor Balloon was nothing 
less than a father to the poor Indians. But Balloon 
is not alone, we have many truly noble statesmen in 
our country’s service like Balloon. The Senate is 
full of them. Don’t you think so, Colonel?” 

“Well, I dunno. I honor my country’s public 
servants as much as any one can. I meet them, 
sir, every day, and the more I see of them the more 
I esteem them and the more grateful I am that our 
institutions give us the opportunity of securing their 
services. Few lands are so blessed.” 

45 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“That is true, Colonel. To be sure you can buy 
now and then a Senator or a Representative; but 
they do not know it is wrong, and so they are not 
ashamed of it. They are gentle, and confiding and 
childlike, and, in my opinion, these are qualities that 
ennoble them far more than any amount of sinful 
sagacity could. I quite agree with you, Colonel 
Sellers.”’ 

‘“Well”’—hesitated the Colonel—‘‘I am afraid 
some of them do buy their seats—yes, I am afraid 
they do—but as Senator Dilworthy himself said to 
me, it is sinful—it is very wrong—it is shameful; 
Heaven protect me from such a charge. That is 
what Dilworthy said. And yet when you come to 
look at it you cannot deny that we would have to 
go without the services of some of our ablest men, 
sir, if the country were opposed to—to—bribery. 
It isa harsh term. I do not like to use it.” 

The Colonel interrupted himself at this point to 
meet an engagement with the Austrian minister, and 
took his leave with his usual courtly bow. 


CHAPTER V 
THE BOOK-STORE CLERK 
UsSEaECT 


“Batainadon nin-masinaiganan, kakina gaie onijishinon.”— 
“Missawa onijishining kakina o masinaiganan, kawin gwetch 
o-wabandansinan.” Baraga. 


N due time Laura alighted at the book-store, and 

began to look at the titles of the handsome 
array of books on the counter. <A dapper clerk, of 
perhaps nineteen or twenty years, with hair accu- 
rately parted and surprisingly slick, came bustling 
up and leaned over with a pretty smile and an 
affable— 

“Can I-—was there any particular book you 
wished to see?” 

‘““Have you Taine’s England?”’ 

‘‘Beg pardon?” 

‘““Taine’s Notes on England.” 

The young gentleman scratched the side of his 
nose with a cedar pencil which he took down from 
its bracket on the side of his head, and reflected a 
moment: 

‘““Ah—I see” (with a bright smile)—‘‘Train, you 
mean—not Taine. George Francis Train. No, 
ma’am we—’”’ 

47 


MARK TWAIN 


‘IT mean Taine—if I may take the liberty.” 

The clerk reflected again—then: 

“Taine... Tame... . Is it hymns?” 

‘‘No, it isn’t hymns. It is a volume that is 
making a deal of talk just now, and is very widely 
known—except among parties who sell it.” 

The clerk glanced at her face to see if a sarcasm 
might not lurk somewhere in that obscure speech, 
but the gentle simplicity of the beautiful eyes that 
met his banished that suspicion. He went away 
and conferred with the proprietor. Both appeared 
to be nonplussed. They thought and talked, and 
talked and thought by turns. Then both came 
forward and the proprietor said: 

“Is it an American book, ma’am?”’ 

‘‘No, it is an American reprint of an English 
translation.”’ 

“Oh! Yes—yes—I remember, now. We are 
expecting it every day. It isn’t out yet.” 

“TI think you must be mistaken, because you 
advertised it a week ago.” 

‘“Why no—can that be so? 

‘“Yes, I am sure of it. And besides, here is the 
book itself, on the counter.”’ 

She bought it and the proprietor retired from the 
field. Then she asked the clerk for the Autocrat of 
the Breakfast Table—and was pained to see the 
admiration her beauty had inspired in him fade out 
of his face. He said with cold dignity that cook- 
books were somewhat out of their line, but he would 
order it if she desired it. She said, no, never mind. 
Then she fell to conning the titles again, finding a 

48 


THE GILDED AGE 


delight in the inspection of the Hawthornes, the 
Longfellows, the Tennysons, and other favorites of 
her idle hours. Meantime the clerk’s eyes were 
busy, and no doubt his admiration was returning 
again—or maybe he was only gauging her probable 
literary tastes by some sagacious system of ad- 
measurement only known to his guild. Now he 
began to ‘‘assist’’ her in making a selection; but his 
efforts met with no success—dindeed, they only 
annoyed her and unpleasantly interrupted her medi- 
tations. Presently, while she was holding a copy 
of Venetian Life in her hand and running over 
a familiar passage here and there, the clerk said, 
briskly, snatching up a paper-covered volume and 
striking the counter a smart blow with it to dislodge 
the dust: 

‘“Now here is a work that we’ve sold a lot of. 
Everybody that’s read it likes it’’-—and he intruded 
it under her nose; ‘‘it’s a book that I can recom- 
mend— The Pirate’s Doom, or the Last of the 
Buccaneers. I think it’s one of the best things 
that’s come out this season.’’ 

Laura pushed it gently aside with her hand and 
went on filching from Venetian Life 

“*T believe I do not want it,’’ she said. 

The clerk hunted around awhile, glancing at one 
title and then another, but apparently not finding 
what he wanted. However, he succeeded at last. 
said he: 

‘“Have you ever read this, ma’am? I am sure 
you'll like it. It’s by the author of The Hooligans 
of Hackensack. It is full of love troubles and 

49 


MARK TWAIN 


mysteries and all sorts of such things. The heroine 
strangles her own mother. Just glance at the title, 
please—Gonderil the Vampire, or The Dance of 
Death. And here is The Jokist’s Own Treasury, 
or, The Phunny Phellow’s Bosom Phriend. The 
funniest thing!—I’ve read it four times, ma’am, and 
I can laugh at the very sight of it yet. And 
Gonderil—I assure you it is the most splendid 
book I ever read. I know you will like these books, 
ma’am, because I’ve read them myself and I know 
what they are.”’ 

‘‘Oh, I was perplexed—but I see how it is, now. 
You must have thought I asked you to tell me what 
sort of books I wanted—for I am apt to say things 
which I don’t really mean, when I am absent-minded. 
I suppose I did ask you, didn’t I?” 

‘‘No, ma’am—but I—’”’ 

‘““Yes, I must have done it, else you would not 
have offered your services, for fear it might be rude. 
But don’t be troubled—it was all my fault. I 
ought not to have been so heedless—I ought not to 
have asked you.” 

“But you didn’t ask me, ma’am. We always 
help customers all we can. You see our experience 
—living right among books all the time—that sort 
of thing makes us able to help a customer make a 
selection, you know.”’ 

‘“Now does it, indeed? It is part of your busi- 
ness, then?”’ 

‘“Yes’m, we always help.” 

‘How good it is of you! Some people would 
think it rather obtrusive, perhaps, but I don’t—I 

50 


THE GILDED AGE 


think it is real kindness—even charity. Some peo- 
ple jump to conclusions without any thought—you 
have noticed that?’ 

“‘Oh, yes,’ said the clerk, a little perplexed as 
to whether to feel comfortable or the reverse; ‘‘oh, 
yes, indeed, I’ve often noticed that, ma’am.”’ 

‘Yes, they jump to conclusions with an absurd 
heedlessness. Now some people would think it odd 
that because you, with the budding tastes and the 
innocent enthusiasms natural to your time of life, 
enjoyed the Vampires and the volume of nursery 
jokes, you should imagine that an older person 
would delight in them, too—but I do not think it 
odd at all. I think it natural—perfectly natural— 
in you. And kind, too. You look like a person 
who not only finds a deep pleasure in any little thing 
in the way of literature that strikes you forcibly, 
but is willing and glad to share that pleasure with 
others—and that, I think, is noble and admirable 
—very noble and admirable. I think we ought all 
to share our pleasures with others, and do what 
we can to make each other happy, do not you?”’ 

‘‘Oh, yes. Oh, yes, indeed. Yes, you are quite 
right, ma’am.”’ 

But he was getting unmistakably uncomfortable, 
now, notwithstanding Laura’s confiding sociability 
and almost affectionate tone. 

““Yes, indeed. Many people would think that 
what a bookseller—or perhaps his clerk—knows 
about literature as literature, in contradistinction to 
its character as merchandise, would hardly be of 
much assistance to a person—that is, to an adult, 

51 


MARK TWAIN 


of course—in the selection of food for the mind— 
except, of course, wrapping-paper, or twine, or 
wafers, or something like that—but I never feel 
that way. I feel that whatever service you offer 
me, you offer with a good heart, and I am as grate- 
ful for it as if it were the greatest boon to me. 
And it zs useful to me—it is bound to be so. It 
cannot be otherwise. If you show me a book which 
you have read—not skimmed over or merely glanced 
at, but read—and you tell me that you enjoyed it 
and that you could read it three or four times, then 
I know what book I want—’”’ 

“Thank you!—th—” 

—‘‘to avoid. Yes, indeed. [ think that no in- 
formation ever comes amiss in this world. Once or 
twice I have traveled in the cars—and there, you 
know, the peanut-boy always measures you with his 
eye, and hands you out a book of murders if you 
are fond of theology; or Tupper or a dictionary or 
T. S. Arthur if you are fond of poetry; or he hands 
you a volume of distressing jokes or a copy of the 
American Miscellany if you particularly dislike that 
sort of literary fatty degeneration of the heart— 
just for the world like a pleasant-spoken, well- 
meaning gentleman in any book-store— But here 
I am running on as if business men had nothing to 
do but listen to women talk. You must pardon me, 
for I was not thinking. And you must let me thank 
you again for helping me. I read a good deal, and 
shall be in nearly every day; and I would be sorry 
to have you think me a customer who talks too 
much and buys too little. Might I ask you to give 

52 


mre GILDED AGE 


me the time? Ah—two—twenty-two. Thank you 
very much. I will set mine while I have the 
opportunity.” 

But she could not get her watch open, apparently. 
She tried, and tried again. ‘Then the clerk, trem- 
bling at his own audacity, begged to be allowed to 
assist. She allowed him. He succeeded, and was 
radiant with gratification under the sweet influences 
of her pleased face and her seductively worded ac- 
knowledgments. Then he gave her the exact time 
again, and anxiously watched her turn the hands 
slowly till they reached the precise spot without 
accident or loss of life, and then he looked as happy 
as a man who had helped a fellow-being through a 
momentous undertaking, and was grateful to know 
that he had not lived in vain. Laura thanked him 
once more. The words were music to his ear; but 
what were they compared to the ravishing smile with 
which she flooded his whole system? When she 
bowed her adieu and turned away, he was no longer 
suffering torture in the pillory where she had had 
him trussed up during so many distressing moments, 
but he belonged to the list of her conquests and was 
a flattered and happy thrall, with the dawn-light of 
love breaking over the eastern elevations of his heart. 

It was about the hour, now, for the chairman of 
the House Committee on Benevolent Appropriations 
to make his appearance, and Laura stepped to the 
door to reconnoiter. She glanced up the street, 
and sure enough— 


CHAPTER VI 


LAURA COQUETS WITH BUCKSTONE 


Be ser Beal eile Eel TF Hd Pvom 


Usa ogn’ arte la donna, onde sia célto 
Nella sua rete alcun novello amante; 
Né con tutti, né sempre un stesso volto 


Serba, ma cangia a tempo atti e sembiante. 
Tasso. 


HAT chairman was nowhere in sight. Such 
disappointments seldom occur in novels, but 
are always happening in real life. 

She was obliged to make a new plan. She sent 
him a note, and asked him to call in the evening— 
which he did. 

She received the Hon. Mr. Buckstone with a 
sunny smile, and said: 

‘‘T don’t know how I ever dared to send you a 
note, Mr. Buckstone, for you have the reputation of 
not being very partial to our sex.” 

“Why, I am sure my reputation does me wrong, 
then, Miss Hawkins. I have been married once— 
is that nothing in my favor?” 

‘‘Oh, yes—that is, it may be and it may not be. 
If you have known what perfection is in woman, it 
is fair to argue that inferiority cannot interest you 
now.”’ 

54 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘““Even if that were the case it could not affect 
you, Miss Hawkins,” said the chairman gallantly. 
“‘Fame does not place you in the list of ladies 
who rank below perfection.”’ 

This happy speech delighted Mr. Buckstone as 
much as it seemed to delight Laura. But it did not 
confuse him as much as it apparently did her. 

“IT wish in all sincerity that I could be worthy of 
such a felicitous compliment as that. But I ama 
woman, and so [ am gratified for it just as it is, and 
would not have it altered.”’ 

“But it is not merely a compliment—that is, an 
empty compliment—it is the truth. All men will 
indorse that.’ 

Laura looked pleased, and said: © 

“It is very kind of you to say it. It is a distinc- 
tion, indeed, for a country-bred girl like me to be so 
spoken of by people of brains and culture. You 
are so kind that I know you will pardon my putting 
you to the trouble to come this evening.”’ 

“Indeed, it was no trouble. It was a pleasure. 
I am alone in the world since I lost my wife, and I 
often long for the society of your sex, Miss Haw- 
kins, notwithstanding what people may say to the 
contrary.” 

‘It is pleasant to hear you say that. I am sure 
it must be so. If I feel lonely at times, because of 
my exile from old friends, although surrounded by 
new ones who are already very dear to me, how 
much more lonely must you feel, bereft as you are, 
and with no wholesome relief from the cares of state 
that weigh you down. For your own sake, as well 

55 


MARK TWAIN 


as for the sake of others, you ought to go into society 
oftener. I seldom see you at a reception, and when 
I do you do not usually give me very much of your 
attention.”’ 

“‘I never imagined that you wished it or I would 
have been very glad to make myself happy in that 
way. But one seldom gets an opportunity to say 
more than a sentence to you in a place like that. 
You are always the center of a group—a fact which 
you may have noticed yourself. But if one might 
come here—”’ 

“Indeed you would always find a hearty wel- 
come, Mr. Buckstone. I have often wished you 
would come and tell me more about Cairo and 
the Pyramids, as you once promised me you would.”’ 

“Why, do you remember that yet, Miss Haw- 
kins? I thought ladies’ memories were more fickle 
than that.” 

*“‘Oh, they are not so fickle as gentlemen’s prom- 
ises. And besides, if I had been inclined to forget, 
I—did you not give me something by way of a 
remembrancer ?”’ 

“Did I?” 

**Think,”’ 

“It does seem to me that I did; but I have for- 
gotten what it was now.” 

““Never, never call a lady’s memory fickle again! 
Do you recognize this?”’ 

“A little spray of box! I am beaten—I sur- 
render. But have you kept that all this time?” 

Laura’s confusion was very pretty. She tried to 
hide it, but the more she tried the more manifest 

56 


ie CrLDmMD AGE 


it became and withal the more captivating to look 
upon. Presently she threw the spray of box from 
her with an annoyed air, and said: 

“‘T forgot myself. I have been very foolish. I 
beg that you will forget this absurd thing.” 

Mr. Buckstone picked up the spray, and, sitting 
down by Laura’s side on the sofa, said: 

‘“Please let me keep it, Miss Hawkins. I set a 
very high value upon it now.”’ 

‘“Give it to me, Mr. Buckstone, and do not speak 
so. I have been sufficiently punished for my 
thoughtlessness. You cannot take pleasure in add- 
ing to my distress. Please give it to me.” 

‘*Indeed I do not wish to distress you. But do 
not consider the matter so gravely; you have done 
yourself no wrong. You probably forgot that you 
had it; but if you had given it to me I would have 
kept it—and not forgotten it.”’ 

‘Do not talk so, Mr. Buckstone. Give it to me, 
please, and forget the matter.” 

“Tt would not be kind to refuse, since it troubles 
you so, and so I restore it. But if you would give 
me part of it and keep the rest—”’ 

‘‘So that you might have something to remind you 
of me when you wished to laugh at my foolishness?” 

‘‘Oh, by no means, no! Simply that I might 
remember that I had once assisted to discomfort 
you, and be reminded to do so no more.”’ 

Laura looked up, and scanned his face a moment. 
She was about to break the twig, but she hesitated 
and said: 

“Tf I were sure that you—’’ She threw the 

57 


“MARK TWAIN 


spray away, and continued: “This is silly! We will 
change the subject. No, do not insist—I must have 
my way in this.” 

Then Mr. Buckstone drew off his forces and pro- 
ceeded to make a wily advance upon the fortress 
under cover of carefully contrived artifices and 
stratagems of war. But he contended with an alert 
and suspicious enemy; and so at the end of two hours 
it was manifest to him that he had made but little 
progress. Still, he had made some; he was sure of that. 

Laura sat alone and communed with herself: 

‘‘He is fairly hooked, poor thing. I can play 
him at my leisure and land him when I choose. He 
was all ready to be caught, days and days ago—lI 
saw that, very well. He will vote for our bill— 
no fear about that; and moreover he will work for 
it, too, before I am done with him. If he had a 
woman’s eyes he would have noticed that the spray 
of box had grown three inches since he first gave it 
to me, but a man never sees anything and never 
suspects. If I had shown him a whole bush he 
would have thought it was the same. Well, it is 
a good night’s work; the committee is safe. But this 
is a desperate game I am playing in these days—a 
wearing, sordid, heartless game. If I lose, I lose 
everything—even myself. And if I win the game, 
will it be worth its cost after all? I do not know. 
Sometimes I doubt. Sometimes I half wish I had 
not begun. But no matter; I have begun, and I 
will never turn back; never while I live.’’ 

Mr. Buckstone indulged in a reverie as he walked 
homeward: 

58 


fie ClLDED AGE 


‘She is shrewd and deep, and plays her cards 
with considerable discretion—but she will lose, for 
all that. There is no hurry; I shall come out 
winner, all in good time. She zs the most beautiful 
woman in the world; and she surpassed herself 
to-night. I suppose I must vote for that bill, in 
the end, maybe; but that is not a matter of much 
consequence—the government can stand it. She is 
bent on capturing me, that is plain; but she will 
find by and by that what she took for a sleeping 
garrison was an ambuscade.”’ 


CHAPTER VII 
LAURA SEES COLONEL SELBY AGAIN 


Now this surprising news scaus’d her fall in a trance, 
Like as she were dead, no limbs she could advance, 
Then her dear brother came, her from the ground he took 
And she spake up and said, O my poor heart is broke. 
The Barnardcastle Tragedy. 


Dae you think he is distinguished-looking ?”’ 
‘What! That gawky-looking person, with 
Miss Hawkins?”’ 

“There. He’s just speaking to Mrs. Schoon- 
maker. Such high-bred negligence and unconscious- 
ness. Nothing studied. See his fine eyes.” 

‘Very. They are moving this way now. Maybe 
he is coming here. But he looks as helpless as a 
rag baby. Who is he, Blanche?” 

“Who is he? And you’ve been here a week, 
Grace, and don’t know? He’s the catch of the 
season. That’s Washington Hawkins—her brother.”’ 

BNO, is it?” 

‘Very old family, old Kentucky family, I believe. 
fHHe’s got enormous landed property in Tennes- 
see, I think. The family lost everything, slaves 
and that sort of thing, you know, in the war. But 
they have a great deal of land, minerals, mines, and 
all that. Mr. Hawkins and his sister too are very 

60 


THE GILDED AGE 


much interested in the amelioration of the condition 
of the colored race; they have some plan, with 
Senator Dilworthy, to convert a large part of their 
property to something another for the freedmen.” 

“You don’t say so? I thought he was some guy 
from Pennsylvania. But he zs different from others. 
Probably he has lived all his life on his plantation.”’ 

It was a day reception of Mrs. Representative 
Schoonmaker, a sweet woman, of simple and sincere 
manners. Her house was one of the most popular 
in Washington. There was less ostentation there 
than in some others, and people liked to go where 
the atmosphere reminded them of the peace and 
purity of home. Mrs. Schoonmaker was as natural 
and unaffected in Washington society as she was in 
her own New York house, and kept up the spirit of 
home life there, with her husband and children. 
And that was the reason, probably, why people of 
refinement liked to go there. 

Washington is a microcosm, and one can suit 
himself with any sort of society within a radius of 
a mile. To a large portion of the people who fre- 
quent Washington or dwell there, the ultra fashion, 
the shoddy, the jobbery are as utterly distasteful as 
they would be in a refined New England city. 
Schoonmaker was not exactly a leader in the House, 
but he was greatly respected for his fine talents and 
his honesty. No one would have thought of offering 
to carry National Improvement Directors Relief 
stock for him. 

These day receptions were attended by more 
women than men, and those interested in the prob- 

61 


MARK TWAIN 


lem might have studied the costumes of the ladies 
present, in view of this fact, to discover whether 
women dress more for the eyes of women or for 
effect upon men. It is a very important problem, 
and has been a good deal discussed, and its solution 
would form one fixed, philosophical basis, upon 
which to estimate woman’s character. We are in- 
clined to take a medium ground, and aver that 
woman dresses to please herself, and in obedience to 
a law of her own nature. 

‘“‘They are coming this way,’’ said Blanche. 
People who made way for them to pass turned to 
look at them. Washington began to feel that the 
eyes of the public were on him also, and his eyes 
rolled about, now toward the ceiling, now toward 
the floor, in an effort to look unconscious. 

‘‘Good morning, Miss Hawkins. Delighted. Mr. 
Hawkins. My friend, Miss Medlar.”’ 

Mr. Hawkins, who was endeavoring to square 
himself for a bow, put his foot through the train of 
Mrs. Senator Poplin, who looked round with a 
scowl, which turned into a smile as she saw who it 
was. In extricating himself, Mr. Hawkins, who 
had the care of his hat as well as the introduction 
on his mind, shambled against Miss Blanche, who 
said pardon, with the prettiest accent, as if the awk- 
wardness were her own. And Mr. Hawkins righted 
himself. 

‘Don’t you find it very warm to-day, Mr. Haw- 
kins?’ said Blanche, by way of a remark. 

‘*Tt’s awful hot,” said Washington. 

‘‘Tt’s warm for the season,’’ continued Blanche 

62 


THE GILDED AGE 


pleasantly. ‘‘But I suppose you are accustomed to 
it,’ she added, with a general idea that the ther- 
mometer always stands at ninety degrees in all parts 
of the late slave states. ‘‘Washington weather gen- 
erally cannot be very congenial to you?”’ 

“‘It’s congenial,’’ said Washington, brightening 
up, ‘‘when it’s not congealed.” 

‘“That’s very good. Did you hear, Grace? Mr. 
Hawkins says it’s congenial when it’s not congealed.”’ 

‘“What is, dear?” said Grace, who was talking 
with Laura. 

The conversation was now finely under way. 
Washington launched out an observation of his own. 

‘Did you see those Japs, Miss Leavitt?’’ 

‘“‘Oh, yes, aren’t they queer? But so high-bred, 
so picturesque. Do you think that color makes any 
difference, Mr. Hawkins? I used to be so prejudiced 
against color.” 

“Did you? I never was. I used to think my 
old mammy was handsome.” 

‘‘How interesting your life must have been! I 
should like to hear about it.” 

Washington was about settling himself into his 
narrative style, when Mrs. General McFingal caught 
his eye. 

‘‘Have you been at the Capitol to-day, Mr. Haw- 
kins?” 

Washington had not. “Is anything uncommon 
going on?” 

‘“They say it was very exciting. The Alabama 
business, you know. General Sutler of Massachu- 
setts defied England, and they say he wants war.” 

63 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘He wants to make himself conspicuous, more 
like,’’ said Laura. ‘‘He always, you have noticed, 
talks with one eye on the gallery, while the other is 
on the Speaker.”’ 

“Well, my husband says, it’s nonsense to talk of 
war, and wicked. He knows what war is. If we do 
have war, I hope it will be for the patriots of Cuba. 
Don’t you think we want Cuba, Mr. Hawkins?” 

““T think we want it bad,’ said Washington. 
“And Santo Domingo. Senator Dilworthy says, 
we are bound to extend our religion over the isles of 
thesea. We've got toround out our territory, and—”’ 

Washington’s further observations were broken 
off by Laura, who whisked him off to another part 
of the room, and reminded him that they must make 
their adieux. 

“How stupid and tiresome these people are!’ she 
said. ‘‘Let’s go.” 

They were turning to say good-by to the hostess, 
when Laura’s attention was arrested by the sight of 
a gentleman who was just speaking to Mrs. Schoon- 
maker. For a second her heart stopped beating. 
He was a handsome man of forty and perhaps more, 
with grayish hair and whiskers, and he walked with 
a cane, as if he were slightly lame. He might be 
less than forty, for his face was worn into hard 
lines, and he was pale. 

No. It could not be, she said to herself. It is 
only a resemblance. But as the gentleman turned 
and she saw his full face, Laura put out her hand 
and clutched Washington’s arm to prevent herself 
from falling. 

64 


THE GILDED AGE 


Washington, who was not minding anything, as 
usual looked round in wonder. Laura’s eyes were 
blazing fire and hatred; he had never seen her look 
so before; and her face was livid. 

‘““Why, what is it, sis? Your face is as white as 
paper.”’ 

‘It’s he, it’s he! Come, come!’ and she dragged 
him away. 

“It’s who?” asked Washington, when they had 
gained the carriage. 

“It’s nobody, it’s nothing. Did I say he? I was 
faint with the heat. Don’t mention it. Don’t you 
speak of it,’ she added earnestly, grasping his arm. 

When she had gained her room she went to the 
glass and saw a pallid and haggard face. 

‘‘My God,” she cried, ‘‘this will never do! I 
should have killed him, if I could. The scoundrel 
still lives, and dares to come here. I ought to kill 
him. He has no right to live. How I hate him! 
And yet I loved him. Oh, heavens, how I did love 
that man! And why didn’t he kill me? He might 
better. He did kill all that was good in me. Oh, 
but he shall not escape. He shall not escape this 
time. He may have forgotten. He will find that 
a woman’s hate doesn’t forget. The law? What 
would the law do but protect him and make me an 
outcast? How all Washington would gather up its 
virtuous skirts and avoid me, if it knew. I wonder 
if he hates me as I do him?”’ 

So Laura raved, in tears and in rage by turns, 
tossed in a tumult of passion, which she gave way 
to with little effort to control. 

65 


MARK TWAIN 


A servant came to summon her to dinner. She 
had a headache. The hour came for the President’s 
reception. She had a raving headache, and the 
Senator must go without her. 

That night of agony was like another night she 
recalled. How vividly it all came back to her! And 
at that time she remembered she thought she might 
be mistaken. He might come back to her! Perhaps 
he loved her, a little, after all. Now, she knew he 
did not. Now, she knew he was a cold-blooded 
scoundrel, without pity. Never a word in all these 
years. She had hoped he was dead. Did his wife 
live, she wondered. She caught at that, and it gave 
a new current to her thoughts. Perhaps, after all— 
she must see him. She could not live without seeing 
him. Would he smile as in the old days when she 
loved him so; or would he sneer as when she last 
saw him? If he looked so, she hated him. If he 
should call her ‘‘Laura, darling,’ and look so! She 
must find him. She must end her doubts. 

Laura kept her room for two days, on one excuse 
and another—a nervous headache, a cold—to the 
great anxiety of the Senator’s household. Callers, 
who went away, said she had been too gay—they 
did not say ‘‘fast,’”’ though some of them may have 
thought it. One so conspicuous and successful in 
society as Laura could not be out of the way two 
days without remarks being made, and not all of 
them complimentary. 

When she came down she appeared as usual, a 
little pale, maybe, but unchanged in manner. If 
there were any deepened lines about the eyes they 

66 


THE GILDED AGE 


had been concealed. Her course of action was quite 
determined. 

At breakfast she asked if any one had heard any 
unusual noise during the night? Nobody had. 
Washington never heard any noise of any kind after 
his eyes were shut. Some people thought he never 
did when they were open, either. 

Senator Dilworthy said he had come in late. He 
was detained in a little consultation after the Con- 
gressional prayer-meeting. Perhaps it was his 
entrance. 

No, Laura said. She heard that. It was later. 
She might have been nervous, but she fancied 
somebody was trying to get into the house. 

Mr. Brierly humorously suggested that it might 
be, as none of the members were occupied in night 
session. 

The Senator frowned, and said he did not like to 
hear that kind of newspaper slang. There might 
be burglars about. 

Laura said that very likely it was only her ner- 
vousness. But she thought she would feel safer if 
Washington would let her take one of his pistols. 
Washington brought her one of his revolvers, and 
instructed her in the art of loading and firing it. 

During the morning Laura drove down to Mrs. 
Schoonmaker’s to pay a friendly call. 

‘Your receptions are always delightful,” she said 
to that lady, ‘‘the pleasant people all seem to come 
here.”’ 

“It’s pleasant to hear you say so, Miss Hawkins. 
I believe my friends like to come here. Though 

di 


MARK TWAIN 


society in Washington is mixed; we have a little of 
everything.” 

‘‘T suppose, though, you don’t see much of the 
old rebel element?’’ said Laura with a smile. 

If this seemed to Mrs. Schoonmaker a singular 
remark for a lady to make, who was meeting ‘“‘rebels’”’ 
in society every day, she did not express it in any 
way, but only said: 

“You know we don’t say ‘rebel’ any more. 
Before we came to Washington I thought rebels 
would look unlike other people. I find we are very 
much alike, and that kindness and good nature wear 
away prejudice. And then you know there are all 
sorts of common interests. My husband sometimes 
says that he doesn’t see but Confederates are just as 
eager to get at the treasury as Unionists. You 
know that Mr. Schoonmaker is on the appropria- 
tions.”’ 

‘*Does he know many Southerners?”’ 

‘‘Oh, yes. There were several at my reception 
the other day. Among others a Confederate col- 
onei—a stranger—handsome man with gray hair— 
probably you didn’t notice him—uses a cane in walk- 
ing. A very agreeable man. I wondered why he 
called. When my husband came home and: looked 
over the cards, he said he had a cotton claim. A 
real Southerner. Perhaps you might know him if I 
could think of his name. Yes, here’s his card— 
Louisiana.” 

Laura took the card, looked at it intently till she 
was sure of the address, and then laid-it down, with: 

‘*No, he is no friend of ours.’’ 

68 


THE GILDED AGE 


That afternoon, Laura wrote and despatched the 
following note. It was in a round hand, unlike her 
flowing style, and it was directed to a number and 
street in Georgetown: 


“A Lady at Senator Dilworthy’s would like to see Colonel 
George Selby, on business connected with the Cotton Claims. 
Can he call Wednesday at three o’clock P.m.?” 


On Wednesday at 3 P.M. no one of the family was 
likely to be in the house except Laura. 


CHAPTER VIII 
LAURA AGAIN IN LOVE WITH SELBY 


—Belhs amics, tornatz, 


Per merce, vas me de cors. 
Alphonse II. 


Ala khambiata da zure deseina? 
Hitz eman zenereitan, 
Ez behin, bai berritan, 
Enia zinela. 
—Ohikua niizi; 
Eniza khambiati, 
Bihotzian beinin harti, 
Eta zii maithati. 


Mattia, nun zira? 


OLONEL SELBY had just come to Washington, 

and taken lodgings in Georgetown. His busi- 
ness was to get pay for some cotton that had been 
destroyed during the war. There were many others 
in Washington on the same errand, some of them 
with claims as difficult to establish as his. A concert 
of action was necessary, and he was not, therefore, 
at all surprised to receive the note from a lady ask- 
ing him to call at Senator Dilworthy’s. 

At a little after three on Wednesday he rang the 
bell of the Senator’s residence. It was a handsome 
mansion on the square opposite the Presiderit’s 
house. The owner must be a man of great wealth, 
the Colonel thought; perhaps, who knows, said he 

| ne 


THE GILDED AGE 


with a smile, he may have got some of my cotton in 
exchange for salt and quinine after the capture of 
New Orleans. As this thought passed through his 
mind he was looking at the remarkable figure of the 
Hero of New Orleans, holding itself by main strength 
from sliding off the back of the rearing bronze 
horse, and lifting its hat in the manner of one who 
acknowledges the playing of that martial air, ‘‘See, 
the Conquering Hero Comes.” ‘‘Gad,” said the 
Colonel to himself, ‘“Old Hickory ought to get 
down and give his seat to General Sutler—but 
they’d have to tie him on.” 

Laura was in the drawing-room. She heard the 
bell, she heard the steps in the hall, and the em- 
phatic thud of the supporting cane. She had risen 
from her chair and was leaning against the piano, 
pressing her left hand against the violent beating of 
her heart. The door opened and the Colonel en- 
tered, standing in the full light of the opposite win- 
dow. Laura was more in the shadow and stood 
for an instant, long enough for the Colonel to make 
the inward observation that she was a magnificent 
woman. She then advanced a step. 

“Colonel Selby, is it not?” 

The Colonel staggered back, caught himself by a 
chair, and turned toward her with a look of terror. 

“‘Laura? My God!’ 

““Yes, your wife!’’ 

““Oh, no, it can’t be. How came you here? I 
thought you were—” 

“You thought I was dead? You thought you 
were rid of me? Not so long as you live, Colonel 

71 


MARK TWAIN 


Selby, not so long as you live,’’ Laura in her passion 
was hurried on to say. 

No man had ever accused Colonel Selby of 
cowardice. But he was a coward before this wom- 
an. Maybe he was not the man he once was. 
Where was his coolness? Where was his sneering, 
imperturbable manner, with which he could have 
met, and would have met, any woman he had 
wronged, if he had only been forewarned. He felt 
now that he must temporize, that he must gain time. 
There was danger in Laura’s tone. There was 
something frightful in her calmness. Her steady 
eyes seemed to devour him. 

‘“You have ruined my life,’ she said; ‘‘and I was 
so young, so ignorant, and loved you so. You be- 
trayed me, and left me, mocking me and trampling 
me into the dust, a soiled cast-off. You might bet- 
ter have killed me then. Then I should not have 
hated you.” 

‘Laura,’ said the Colonel, nerving himself, but 
still pale, and speaking appealingly, “‘don’t say 
that. Reproach me. I deserve it. I was a scoun- 
drel. I was everything monstrous. But your beauty 
made me crazy. You are right. I was a brute in 
leaving you as I did. But what could I do? I 
was married, and—”’ 

‘‘And your wife still lives?’ asked Laura, bending 
a little forward in her eagerness. 

The Colonel noticed the action, and he almost 
said ‘‘No,” but he thought of the folly of attempting 
concealment. 

“Yes. She is here.” 


Ties “GILDED AGE 


What little color had wandered back into Laura’s 
face forsook it again. Her heart stood still, her 
strength seemed going from her limbs. Her last 
hope was gone. The room swam before her for a 
moment, and the Colonel stepped toward her, but 
she waved him back, as hot anger again coursed 
through her veins, and said: 

‘“‘And you dare come with her, here, and tell me 
of it, here, and mock me with it! And you think 
I will have it, George? You think IJ will let you live 
with that woman? You think I am as powerless as 
that day I fell dead at your feet?” 

She raged now. She was in a tempest of excite- 
ment. And she advanced toward him with a threat- 
ening mien. She would kill me if she could, thought 
the Colonel; but he thought at the same moment, 
How beautiful she is! He had recovered his head 
now. She was lovely when he knew her, then a 
simple country girl. Now she was dazzling, in the 
fullness of ripe womanhood, a superb creature, with 
all the fascination that a woman of the world has 
for such a man as Colonel Selby. Nothing of this 
was lost on him. He stepped quickly to her, grasped 
both her hands in his, and said: 

‘Laura, stop! think! Suppose I loved you yet’ 
Suppose I hated my fate! What can I do? I am 
broken by the war. I have lost everything almost. 
I had as lief be dead and done with it.”’ 

The Colonel spoke with a low remembered voice 
that thrilied through Laura. He was looking into 
her eyes as he had looked in those old days, when no 
birds of all those that sang in the groves where they 

TO 


MARK TWAIN 


walked sang a note of warning. He was wounded. 
He had been punished. Her strength forsook 
her with her range, and she sank upon a chair, 
sobbing: 

‘‘Oh! my God, I thought I hated him!” 

The Colonel knelt beside her. He took her hand 
and she let him keep it. She looked down into his 
face, with a pitiable tenderness, and said in a weak 
voice: 

‘“‘And you do love me a little?” : 

The Colonel vowed and protested. He kissed her 
hand and her lips. He swore his false soul into 
perdition. 

She wanted love, this woman. Was not her love 
for George Selby deeper than any other woman’s 
could be? Had she not aright tohim? Did he not 
belong to her by virtue of her overmastering passion? 
His wife—she was not his wife, except by the law. 
She couid not be. Even with the law she could 
have no right to stand between two souls that were 
one. It was an infamous condition in society that 
George should be tied to her. 

Laura thought this, believed it, because she de- 
sired to believe it. She came to it as an original 
proposition, founded on the requirements of her 
own nature. She may have heard, doubtless she 
had, similar theories that were prevalent at that day, 
theories of the tyranny of marriage and of the free- 
dom of marriage. She had even heard women 
lecturers say that marriage should only continue so 
long as it pleased either party to it—for a year, or 
a month, or a day. She had not given much heed 

74 


THE GILDED AGE 


to this. But she saw its justice now in a flash of 
revealing desire. It must be right. God would not 
have permitted her to love George Selby as she did, 
and him to love her, if it was right for society to 
raise up a barrier between them. He belonged to 
her. Had he not confessed it himself? 

Not even the religious atmosphere of Senator 
Dilworthy’s house had been sufficient to instil into 
Laura that deep Christian principle which had been 
somehow omitted in her training. Indeed, in that 
very house had she not heard women, prominent 
before the country and besieging Congress, utter 
sentiments that fully justified the course she was 
marking out for herself? 

They were seated now, side by side, talking with 
more calmness. Laura was happy, or thought she 
was. But it was that feverish sort of happiness 
which is snatched out of the black shadow of false- 
hood, and is at the moment recognized as fleeting 
and perilous, and indulged tremblingly. She loved. 
She was loved. That is happiness certainly. And 
the black past and the troubled present and the 
uncertain future could not snatch that from her. 

What did they say as they sat there? What 
nothings do people usually say in such circum- 
stances, even if they are threescore and ten? It was 
enough for Laura to hear his voice and be near 
him. It was enough for him to be near her, and 
avoid committing himself as much as he could. 
Enough for him was the present also. Had there 
not always been some way out of such scrapes? 

And yet Laura could not be quite content without 

75 


MARK TWAIN 


prying into to-morrow. How could the Colonel 
manage to free himself from his wife? Would it 
be long? Could he not go into some state where 
it would not take much time? MHe could not say 
exactly. That they must think of. That they must 
talk over. And soon. Did this seem like a damn- 
able plot to Laura against the life, maybe, of a sister, 
a woman like herself? Probably not. It was right 
that this man should be hers, and there were some 
obstacles in the way. That was all. There are as 
good reasons for bad actions as for good ones, to those 
who commit them. When one has broken the 
tenth commandment, the others are not of much 
account. 

Was it unnatural, therefore, that when George 
Selby departed, Laura should watch him from the 
window, with an almost joyful heart,as he went down 
the sunny square? ‘‘I shall see him to-morrow,”’ 
she said, ‘‘and the next day, and the next. He is 
mine now.”’ 

‘‘Damn the woman,” said the Colonel, as he 
picked his way down the steps. ‘‘Or,” he added, 
as his thoughts took a new turn, ‘‘I wish my wife 
was in New Orleans.” 


CHAPTER I< 
HOW WASHINGTON NEWS LEAKS OUT 


Open your ears; for which of you will stop 

The vent of hearing, when loud Rumor speaks? 
I, from the Orient to the drooping West, 
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold 
The acts commenced on this ball of earth: 
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride; 

The which in every language I pronounce, 


Stuffing the ears of men with false reports. 
King Henry IV. 


S may be readily believed, Col. Beriah Sellers 

was by this time one of the best-known men 

in Washington. For the first time in his life his 
talents had a fair field. 

He was now at the center of the manufacture of 
gigantic schemes, of speculations of all sorts, of 
political and social gossip. The atmosphere was 
full of little and big rumors and of vast, undefined 
expectations. Everybody was in haste, too, to push 
on his private plan, and feverish in his haste, as if 
in constant apprehension that to-morrow would be 
Judgment Day. Work while Congress is in session, 
said the uneasy spirit, for in the recess there is no 
work and no device. 

The Colonel enjoyed this bustle and confusion 
amazingly; he thrived in the air of indefinite expec- 
tation. All his own schemes took larger shape and 

77 


MARK TWAIN 


more misty and majestic proportions; and in this 
congenial air the Colonel seemed even to himself to 
expand into something large and mysterious. If he 
respected himself before, he almost worshiped Ber- 
iah Sellers now, as a superior being. If he could 
have chosen an official position out of the highest, 
he would have been embarrassed in the selection. 
The Presidency of the republic seemed too limited 
and cramped in the constitutional restrictions. If 
he could have been Grand Llama of the United 
States, that might have come the nearest to his idea 
of a position. And next to that he would have 
luxuriated in the irresponsible omniscience of the 
special correspondent. 

Colonel Sellers knew the President very well, and 
had access to his presence when officials were kept 
cooling their heels in the waiting-room. ‘The Presi- 
dent liked to hear the Colonel talk, his voluble ease 
was a refreshment after the decorous dullness of 
men who only talked business and government, 
and everlastingly expounded their notions of jus- 
tice and the distribution of patronage. The Col- 
onel was as much a lover of farming and of horses 
as Thomas Jefferson was. He talked to the Presi- 
dent by the hour about his magnificent stud, and 
his plantation at Hawkeye, a kind of principality 
he represented it. He urged the President to pay 
him a visit during the recess, and see his stock- 
farm. 

‘“The President’s table is well enough,’ he used 
to say, to the loafers who gathered about him at 
Willard’s, ‘‘well enough for a man on a salary, but, 

78 


DE "cil DED” AGE 


God bless my soul, I should like him to see a little 
old-fashioned hospitality—open house, you know. 
A person seeing me at home might think I paid no 
attention to what was in the house, just let things 
flow in and out. He’d be mistaken. What I look 
to is quality, sir. The President has variety enough, 
but the quality! Vegetables, of course, you can’t 
expect here. I’m very particular about mine. Take 
celery, now—there’s only one spot in this country 
where celery will grow. But I am surprised about 
the wines. I should think they were manufactured 
in the New York Custom House. I must send the 
President some from my cellar. I was really morti- 
fied the other day at dinner to see Blacque Bey leave 
his standing in the glasses.”’ 

When the Colonel first came to Washington he 
had thoughts of taking the mission to Constanti- 
nople, in order to be on the spot to look after the 
dissemination of his Eye-Water, but as that inven- 
tion was not yet quite ready, the project shrank a 
little in the presence of vaster schemes. Besides he 
felt that he could do the country more good by re- 
maining at home. He was one of the Southerners 
who were constantly quoted as heartily “‘accepting 
the situation.” 

“I’m whipped,’’ he used to say with a jolly laugh, 
‘“‘the government was too many for me; I’m cleaned 
out, done for, except my plantation and private 
mansion. We played for a big thing, and lost it, and 
I don’t whine, for one. I go for putting the old flag 
on all the vacant lots. I said to the President, says 
I, ‘Grant, why don’t you take Santo Domingo, 

79 


MARK TWAIN 


annex the whole thing, and settle the bill afterward ?” 
That’s my way. I'd take the job to manage Con- 
gress. The South would come into it. You’ve got 
to conciliate the South, consolidate the two debts, 
pay ’em off in greenbacks, and go ahead. That’s 
my notion. Boutwell’s got the right notion about 
the value of paper, but he lacks courage. I should 
like to run the Treasury Department about six 
months. I’d make things plenty, and business look 
hon 

The Colonel had access to the departments. He 
knew all the Senators and Representatives, and 
especially the lobby. He was consequently a great 
favorite in Newspaper Row, and was often lounging 
in the offices there, dropping bits of private, official 
information, which were immediately caught up and 
telegraphed all over the country. But it used to 
surprise even the Colonel when he read it; it was 
embellished to that degree that he hardly recognized 
it, and the hint was not lost on him. He began to 
exaggerate his heretofore simple conversation to suit 
the newspaper demand. 

People used to wonder in the winters of 187— and 
187-, where the ‘‘Specials’”’ got that remarkable 
information with which they every morning sur- 
prised the country, revealing the most secret inten- 
tions of the President and his Cabinet, the private 
thoughts of political leaders, the hidden meaning of 
every movement. This information was furnished 
by Colonel Sellers. 

When he was asked, afterward, about the stolen 
copy of the Alabama Treaty which got into the 

80 


THE GILDED AGE 


New York Tribune, he only looked mysterious, and 
said that neither he nor Senator Dilworthy knew 
anything about it. But those whom he was in the 
habit of meeting occasionally felt almost certain that 
he did know. 

It must not be supposed that the Colonel in his 
general patriotic labors neglected his own affairs. 
The Columbus River navigation scheme absorbed 
only a part of his time, so he was enabled to throw 
quite a strong reserve force of energy into the Ten- 
nessee Land plan, a vast enterprise commensurate 
with his abilities, and in the prosecution of which he 
was greatly aided by Mr. Henry Brierly, who was 
buzzing about the Capitol and the hotels day and 
night, and making capital for it in some mysterious 
way. 

‘“We must create a public opinion,’’ said Senator 
Dilworthy. ‘‘My only interest in it is a public one, 
and if the country wants the institution, Congress 
will have to yield.” 

It may have been after a conversation between 
the Colonel and Senator Dilworthy that the following 
special despatch was sent to a New York newspaper: 


:] 


We understand that a philanthropic plan is on foot in rela- 
tion to the colored race that will, if successful, revolutionize the 
whole character of Southern industry. An experimental insti- 
tution is in contemplation in Tennessee which will do for that 
state what the Industrial School at Zurich did for Switzerland. 
We learn that approaches have been made to the heirs of the 
late Hon. Silas Hawkins, of Missouri, in reference to a lease of 
a portion of their valuable property in East Tennessee. Senator 
Dilworthy, it is understood, is inflexibly opposed to any arrange- 
ment that will not give the government absolute control. 
Private interest must give way to the public good. It is to be 

. 81 


MARK TWAIN 


hoped that Colonel Sellers, who represents the heirs, will be led 
to see the matter in this light. 

When Washington Hawkins read this despatch, 
he went to the Colonel in some anxiety. He was 
for a lease, he didn’t want to surrender anything. 
What did he think the government would offer? 
Two millions? 

‘‘Maybe three, maybe four,’’ said the Colonel, 
“it’s worth more than the Bank of England.” 

“Tf they will not lease,’’ said Washington, ‘‘let 
"em make it two millions for an undivided half. I’m 
not going to throw it away, not the whole of it.” 

Harry told the Colonel that they must drive the 
thing through, he couldn’t be dallying round Wash- 
ington when spring opened. Phil wanted him, Phil 
had a great thing on hand up in Pennsylvania. 

‘What is that?’ inquired the Colonel, always 
ready to interest himself in anything large. 

‘‘A mountain of coal; that’s all. He’s going to 
run a tunnel into it in the spring.”’ 

‘“Does he want any capital?’ asked the Colonel, 
in the tone of a man who is given to calculating 
carefully before he makes an investment. 

‘‘No. Old man Bolton’s behind him. He has 
capital, but I judged that he wanted my experience 
in starting.”’ 

‘If he wants me, tell him I'll come, after Con- 
gress adjourns. I should like to give him a little 
lift. He lacks enterprise—now, about that Colum- 
bus River. He doesn’t see his chances. But he’s 
a good fellow, and you can tell him that Sellers 
won't go back on him.”’ 

82 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘By the way,’ asked Harry, ‘‘who is that rather 
handsome party that’s hanging round Laura? I 
see him with her everywhere, at the Capitol, in the 
horse-cars, and he comes to Dilworthy’s. If he 
weren't lame, I should think he was going to run 
off with her.” 

‘‘Oh, that’s nothing. Laura knows her busi- 
ness. He has a cotton claim. Used to be at 
Hawkeye during the war—Selby’s his name, was a 
Colonel. Got a wife and family. Very respectable 
people, the Selbys.”’ 

“Well, that’s all right,’’ said Harry, ‘‘if it’s busi- 
ness. But if a woman looked at me as I’ve seen her 
at Selby, I should understand it. And it’s talked 
about, I can tell you.”’ 

Jealousy had, no doubt, sharpened this young 
gentleman’s observation. Laura could not have 
treated him with more lofty condescension if she had 
been the Queen of Sheba, on a royal visit to the great 
republic. And he resented it, and was “‘huffy’’ when 
he was with her, and ran her errands, and brought 
her gossip, and bragged of his intimacy with the lovely 
creature among the fellows at Newspaper Row. 

Laura’s life was rushing on now in the full stream 
of intrigue and fashionable dissipation. She was 
conspicuous at the balls of the fastest set, and was 
suspected of being present at those doubtful sup- 
pers that began late and ended early. If Senator 
Dilworthy remonstrated about appearances, she 
had a way of silencing him. Perhaps she had some 
hold on him, perhaps she was necessary to his plan 
for ameliorating the condition of the colored race. 

83 


MARK TWAIN 


She saw Colonel Selby, when the public knew and 
when it did not know. She would see him, what- 
ever excuses he made, and however he avoided her. 
She was urged on by a fever of love and hatred and 
jealousy, which alternately possessed her. Some- 
times she petted him, and coaxed him, and tried all 
her fascinations. And again she threatened him and 
reproached him. What was he doing? Why had 
he taken no steps to free himself? Why didn’t he 
send his wife home? She should have money soon. 
They could go to Europe—anywhere. What did 
she care for talk? 

And he promised, and lied, and invented fresh 
excuses for delay, like a cowardly gambler and roué 
as he was, fearing to break with her, and half the 
time unwilling to give her up. 

““That woman doesn’t know what fear is,” he 
said to himself, ‘‘and she watches me like a hawk.”’ 

He told his wife that this woman was a lobbyist, 
whom he had to tolerate and use in getting through 
his claims, and that he should pay her and have 
done with her, when he succeeded. 


CHAPTER X 


HARRY HOPELESSLY IN LOVE 
&@ #47 6 2 97, 77 
Carre Ai a) ss le o S59 
7 
o o 70 ° od oe 
ee be yoy JI ES Coy 
Taj el-'Aroos. 
Egundano ycan daya ni baydienetacoric? 
Ny amoriac enu mayte, nic hura ecin gayecxi. 
Bern. d'Echeparre. 


ENRY BRIERLY was at the Dilworthys’ con- 
stantly and on such terms of intimacy that he 
came and went without question. The Senator was 
not an inhospitable man, he liked to have guests in 
his house, and Harry’s gay humor and rattling way 
entertained him; for even the most devout men and 
busy statesmen must have hours of relaxation. 
Harry himself believed that he was of great service 
in the university business, and that the success of 
the scheme depended upon him to a great degree. 
He spent many hours in talking it over with the 
Senator after dinner. He went so far as to consider 
whether it would be‘worth his while to take the pro- 
fessorship of civil engineering in the new institution. 
But it was not the Senator’s society nor his din- 
ners—at which this scapegrace remarked that there 
was too much grace and too little wine—which 
85 


MARK TWAIN 


attracted him to the house. The fact was, the poor 
fellow hung around there day by day for the chance 
of seeing Laura for five minutes at a time. For her 
presence at dinner he would endure the long bore of 
the Senator’s talk afterward, while Laura was off at 
some assembly, or excused herself on the plea of 
fatigue. Now and then he accompanied her to 
some reception, and rarely, on off nights, he was 
blessed with her company in the parlor, when he 
sang, and was chatty and vivacious and performed 
a hundred little tricks of imitation and ventril- 
oquism, and made himself as entertaining as a man 
could be. 

It puzzled him not a little that all his fascinations 
seemed to go for so little with Laura; it was beyond 
his experience with women. Sometimes Laura was 
exceedingly kind, and petted him a little, and took 
the trouble to exert her powers of pleasing, and to 
entangle him deeper and deeper. But this, it 
angered him afterward to think, was in private; in 
public she was beyond his reach, and never gave 
occasion to the suspicion that she had any affair 
with him. He was never permitted to achieve the 
dignity of a serious flirtation with her in public. 

‘‘Why do you treat me so?” he once said, re- 
proachfully. 

‘Treat you how?” asked Laura in a sweet voice, 
lifting her eyebrows. 

“You know well enough. You let other fellows 
monopolize you in society, and you are as indifferent 
to me as if we were strangers.” 

‘“‘Can I help it if they are attentive, can I be 

86 


Tre “GTLDED* AGE 


rude? But we are such old friends, Mr. Brierly, 
that I didn’t suppose you would be jealous.”’ 

“YT think I must be a very old friend, then, by 
your conduct towardme. By the same rule, I should 
judge that Colonel Selby must be very new.” 

Laura looked up quickly, as if about to return an 
indignant answer to such impertinence, but she only 
said, ‘‘Well, what of Colonel Selby, sauce-box?”’ 

“Nothing, probably, you'll care for. Your being 
with him so much is the town talk, that’s all.” 

‘“What do people say?” asked Laura calmly. 

“Oh, they say a good many things. You are 

offended, though, to have me speak of it?”’ 
- “Not in the least. You are my true friend. I feel 
that I can trust you. You wouldn’t deceive me, 
Harry?’ throwing into her eyes a look of trust and 
tenderness that melted away all his petulance and 
distrust. ‘“‘What do they say?” 

““Some say that you’ve lost your head about 
him; others that you don’t care any more for him 
than you do for a dozen others, but that he is com- 
pletely fascinated with you and about to desert his 
wife; and others say it is nonsense to suppose you 
would entangle yourself with a married man, and 
that your intimacy only arises from the matter of the 
cotton claims, for which he wants your influence with 
Dilworthy. But you know everybody is talked 
about more or less in Washington. I shouldn’t care; 
but I wish you wouldn’t have so much to do with 
Selby, Laura,’ continued Harry, fancying that he 
was now upon such terms that his advice would be 
heeded. 

87 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘And you believed these slanders?”’ 

‘“‘T don’t believe anything against you, Laura, but 
Colonel Selby does not mean you any good. I know 
you wouldn’t be seen with him if you knew his repu- 
tation.” 

“Do you know him?” Laura asked, as indiffer- 
ently as she could. 

“Only a little. I was at his lodgings in George- 
town a day or two ago, with Colonel Sellers. Sellers 
wanted to talk with him about some patent remedy 
he has, Eye-Water, or something of that sort, which 
he wants to introduce into Europe. Selby is going 
abroad very soon.” 

Laura started, in spite of her self-control. 

‘‘And his wife? Does he take his family? Did 
you see his wife?’’ 

“Yes. <A dark little woman, rather worn—must 
have been pretty once, though. Has three or four 
children, one of them a baby. They’ll all go, of 
course. She said she should be glad enough to get 
away from Washington. You know Selby has got 
his claim allowed, and they say he has had a run 
of luck lately at Morrissey’s.” 

Laura heard all this in a kind of stupor, looking 
straight at Harry, without seeing him. Is it possi- 
ble, she was thinking, that this base wretch, after all 
his promises, will take his wife and children and 
leave me? Is it possible the town is saying all 
these things about me? And—a look of bitterness 
coming into her face—does the fool think he can es- 
cape so? 

“You are angry with me. Laura,’ said Harry, 

88 


THE GILDED AGE 


not comprehending in the least what was going on 
in her mind. 

‘‘Angry?” she said, forcing herself to come back 
to his presence. ‘‘With you? Oh, no. I’m angry 
with the cruel world, which pursues an independent 
woman as it never does a man. I’m grateful to 
you, Harry; I’m grateful to you for telling me of 
that odious man.” 

And she rose from her chair and gave him her 
pretty hand, which the silly fellow took, and kissed 
and clung to. And he said many silly things, 
before she disengaged herself gently, and left him, 
saying it was time to dress for dinner. 

And Harry went away, excited, and a little hope- 
ful, but only a little. The happiness was only a 
gleam, which departed and left him thoroughly 
miserable. She never would love him, and she was 
going to the devil, besides. Hecouldn’t shut his eyes 
to what he saw, nor his ears to what he heard of 
her 

What had come over this trifling young lady- 
killer? It was a pity to see such a gay butterfly 
broken on a wheel. Was there something good in 
him, after all, that had been touched? He was, in 
fact, madly in love with this woman. It is not for 
us to analyze the passion and say whether it was a 
worthy one. It absorbed his whole nature and made 
him wretched enough. If he deserved punishment, 
what more would you have? Perhaps this love was 
kindling a new heroism in him. 

He saw the road on which Laura was going clearly 
enough, though he did not believe the worst he 

89 


MARK TWAIN 


heard of her. He loved her too passionately to 
credit that fora moment. And it seemed to him that 
if he could compel her to recognize her position and 
his own devotion, she might love him, and that he 
could save her. His love was so far ennobled, and 
become a very different thing from its beginning in 
Hawkeye. Whether he ever thought that if he could 
save her from ruin, he could give her up himself, is 
doubtful. Such a pitch of virtue does not occur 
often in real life, especially in such natures as Har- 
ry’s, whose generosity and unselfishness were matters 
of temperament rather than habits or principles. 

He wrote a long letter to Laura, an incoherent, 

passionate letter, pouring out his love as he could 
not do in her presence, and warning her as plainly 
as he dared of the dangers that surrounded her, and 
the risks she ran of compromising herself in many 
ways. ? 
Laura read the letter, with a little sigh, maybe, 
as she thought of other days, but with contempt 
also, and she put it into the fire with the thought, 
‘“They are all alike.” 

Harry was in the habit of writing to Philip freely, 
and boasting also about his doings, as he could not 
help doing and remain himself. Mixed up with his 
own exploits, and his daily triumphs as a lobbyist, 
especially in the matter of the new university, in 
which Harry was to have something handsome, were 
amusing sketches of Washington society, hints about 
Dilworthy, stories about Colonel Sellers, who had 
become a well-known character, and wise remarks 
upon the machinery of private legislation for the 

go 


THE GILDED AGE 


public good, which greatly entertained Philip in his 
convalescence. 

Laura’s name occurred very often in these letters, 
at first in casual mention as the belle of the season, 
carrying everything before her with her wit and 
beauty, and then more seriously, as if Harry did not 
exactly like so much general admiration of her, and 
was a little nettled by her treatment of him. This 
was so different from Harry’s usual tone about 
women, that Philip wondered a good deal over it. 
Could it be possible that he was seriously affected? 
Then came stories about Laura, town talk, gossip 
which Harry denied the truth of indignantly; but 
he was evidently uneasy, and at length wrote in such 
miserable spirits that Philip asked him squarely what 
the trouble was; was he in love? 

Upon this, Harry made a clean breast of it, and 
told Philip all he knew about the Selby affair, and 
Laura’s treatment of him, sometimes encouraging 
him and then throwing him off, and finally his belief 
that she would go to the bad if something was not 
done to arouse her from her infatuation. He wished 
Philip was in Washington. He knew Laura, and 
she had a great respect for his character, his opin- 
ions, his judgment. Perhaps he, as an uninterested 
person in whom she would have some confidence, 
and as one of the public, could say something to 
her that would show her where she stood. 

Philip saw the situation clearly enough. Of 
Laura he knew not much, except that she was a 
woman of uncommon fascination, and he thought 
from what he had seen of her in Hawkeye, her con- 

gi 


MARK TWAIN 


duct toward him and toward Harry, of not too much © 
principle. Of course he knew nothing of her history; 
he knew nothing seriously against her, and if Harry 
was desperately enamoured of her, why should he not 
win her if he could? If, however, she had already 
become what Harry uneasily felt she might become, 
was it not his duty to go to the rescue of his friend 
and try to save him from any rash act on account of 
a woman that might prove to be entirely unworthy 
of him? for, trifler and visionary as he was, Harry 
deserved a better fate than this. 

Philip determined to go to Washington and see 
for himself. He had other reasons also. He began 
to know enough of Mr. Bolton’s affairs to be uneasy. 
Pennybacker had been there several times during the 
winter, and he suspected that he was involving Mr. 
Bolton in some doubtful scheme. Pennybacker was 
in Washington, and Philip thought he might, perhaps, 
find out something about him, and his plans, that 
would be of service to Mr. Bolton. 

Philip had enjoyed his winter very well, for a man 
with his arm broken and his head smashed. With 
two such nurses as Ruth and Alice, illness seemed to 
him rather a nice holiday, and every moment of his 
convalescence had been precious and all too fleeting. 
With a young fellow of the habits of Philip, such 
injuries cannot be counted on to tarry long, even 
for the purpose of love-making, and Philip found 
himself getting strong with even disagreeable rapid- 
ity. 

During his first weeks of pain and weakness, Ruth 
was unceasing in her ministrations; she quietly took 

Q2 


THE GILDED AGE 


charge of him, and with a gentle firmness resisted 
all attempts of Alice or any one else to share to any 
great extent the burden with her. She was clear, 
decisive, and peremptory in whatever she did; but 
often when Philip opened his eyes in those first days 
of suffering and found her standing by his bedside, 
he saw a look of tenderness in her anxious face that 
quickened his already feverish pulse, a look that 
remained in his heart long after he closed his eyes. 
Sometimes he felt her hand on his forehead, and did 
not open his eyes for fear she would take it away. 
He watched for her coming to his chamber; he 
could distinguish her light footstep from all others. 
If this is what is meant by women practising medi- 
cine, thought Philip to himself, I like it. 

“Ruth,” said he one day when he was getting to 
be quite himself, ‘‘I believe in it.” 

‘*Believe in what?” 

‘“Why, in women physicians.” 

‘“Then I’d better call in Mrs. Dr. Longstreet.” 

‘Oh, no. One will do, one at a time. I think 
I should be well to-morrow, if I thought I should 
never have any other.” 

‘Thy physician thinks thee mustn’t talk, Philip,”’ 
said Ruth, putting her finger on his lips. 

‘But Ruth, I want to tell you that I should wish 
I never had got well if—’”’ 

‘‘There, there, thee must mzot talk. Thee is 
wandering again,’”” and Ruth closed his lips, with a 
smile on her own that broadened into a merry laugh 
as she ran away. 

Philip was not weary, however, of making these 

93 


MARK TWAIN 


attempts; he rather enjoyed it. But whenever he . 
inclined to be sentimental, Ruth would cut him off, 
with some such gravely conceived speech as, ‘‘ Does 
thee think that thy physician will take advantage of 
the condition of a man who is as weak as thee is? I 
will call Alice, if thee has any dying confessions to 
make.” 

As Philip convalesced, Alice more and more took 
Ruth’s place as his entertainer, and read to him by 
the hour, when he did not want to talk—to talk 
about Ruth, as he did a good deal of the time. Nor 
was this altogether unsatisfactory to Philip. He 
was always happy and contented with Alice. She 
was the most restful person he knew. Better in- 
formed than Ruth and with a much more varied 
culture, and bright and sympathetic, he was never 
weary of her company, if he was not greatly excited 
by it. She had upon his mind that peaceful in- 
fluence that Mrs. Bolton had when, occasionally, 
she sat by his bedside with her work. Some people 
have this influence, which is like an emanation. 
They bring peace to a house, they diffuse serene 
content in a room full of mixed company, though 
they may say very little, and are apparently uncon- 
scious of their own power. 

Not that Philip did not long for Ruth’s presence 
all the same. Since he was well enough to be about 
the house, she was busy again with her studies. 
Now and then her teasing humor came again. She 
always had a playful shield against his sentiment. 
Philip used sometimes to declare that she had no 
sentiment; and then he doubted if he should be 

04 


THE GILDED AGE 


pleased with her after all if she were at all senti- 
mental; and he rejoiced that she had, in such matters, 
what he called the airy grace of sanity. She was 
the most gay serious person he ever saw. 

Perhaps he was not so much at rest or so con- 
tented with her as with Alice. But then he loved 
her. And what have rest and contentment to do 
with love? 


CHAPTER XI 
MR. TROLLOP IS TRAPPED AND BECOMES AN ALLY 


Subtle. Would I were hang’d then! I'll conform myself. 
Dol. Will you, sir? Do so then, and quickly: swear. 
Sub. What should I swear? 
Dol. To leave your faction, sir, 
And labour kindly in the common work. 
Ben Jonson. The Alchemist. 


Eku edue mfine, ata eku: miduehe mfine, mfine, itaha. 


R.BUCKSTONE’S campaign was brief—much 

briefer than he supposed it would be. He 
began it purposing to win Laura without being won 
himself; but his experience was that of all who had 
fought on that field before him; he diligently con- 
tinued his effort to win her, but he presently found 
that while as yet he could not feel entirely certain of 
having won her, it was very manifest that she had 
won him. He had made an able fight, brief as it 
was, and that at least was to his credit. He was in 
good company, now; he walked in a leash of con- 
spicuous captives. These unfortunates followed 
Laura helplessly, for whenever she took a prisoner 
he remained her slave henceforth. Sometimes they 
chafed in their bondage; sometimes they tore them- 
selves free and said their serfdom was ended; but 
sooner or later they always came back penitent and 

96 


THE GILDED AGE 


worshiping. Laura pursued her usual course; she 
encouraged Mr. Buckstone by turns, and by turns 
she harassed him; she exalted him to the clouds at 
one time, and at another she dragged him down 
again. She constituted him chief champion of the 
Knobs University bill, and he accepted the position, 
at first reluctantly, but later as a valued means of 
serving her—he even came to look upon it as a 
piece of great good fortune, since it brought him into 
such frequent contact with her. 

Through him she learned that the Hon. Mr. 
Trollop was a bitter enemy of her bill. He urged 
her not to attempt to influence Mr. Trollop in any 
way, and explained that whatever she might attempt 
in that direction would surely be used against her 
and with damaging effect. 

She at first said she knew Mr. Trollop, ‘‘and was 
aware that he had a Blank-Blank;’’! but Mr. Buck- 
stone said that while he was not able to conceive 
what so curious a phrase as Blank-Blank might 
mean, and had no wish to pry into the matter, since 
it was probably private, he ‘‘would, nevertheless, 
venture the blind assertion that nothing would answer 
in this particular case and during this particular ses- 
sion but to be exceedingly wary and keep clear 
away from Mr. Trollop; any other course would be 
fatal.’ 

It seemed that nothing could be done. Laura 
was seriously troubled. Everything was looking 
well, and yet it was plain that one vigorous and 
determined enemy might eventually succeed in over- 

1Her private figure of speech for Brother—or Son-in-law. 
97 


MARK TWAIN 


throwing all her plans. A suggestion came into her ~ 
mind presently and she said: 

““Can’t you fight against his great Pension bill 
and bring him to terms?” 

‘‘Oh, never; he and I are sworn brothers on that 
measure; we work in harness and are very loving— 
I do everything I possibly can for him there. But 
I work with might and main against his Immigration 
bill—as pertinaciously and as vindictively, indeed, 
as he works against our university. We hate each 
other through half a conversation and are all affec- 
tion through the other half. We understand each 
other. He is an admirable worker outside the 
Capitol; he will do more for the Pension bill than 
any other man could do; I wish he would make the 
great speech on it which he wants to make—and 
then I would make another and we would be safe.” 

“Well, if he wants to make a great speech why 
doesn’t he do it?” 

Visitors interrupted the conversation and Mr. 
Buckstone took his leave. It was not of the feast 
moment to Laura that her question had not been 
answered, inasmuch as it concerned a thing which 
did not interest her; and yet, human being like, 
she thought she would have liked to know. An 
opportunity occurring presently, she put the same 
question to another person and got an answer that 
satisfied her. She pondered a good while, that night, 
after she had gone to bed, and when she finally 
turned over to go to sleep, she had thought out a 
new scheme. The next evening at Mrs. Gloverson’s 
party, she said to Mr. Buckstone: 

98 


THS GILDED AGE 


“TI want Mr. Trollop to make his great speech on 
the Pension bill.” 

‘‘Do you! But you remember I was interrupted, 
and did not explain to you—’” 

‘‘Never mind, I know. You must make him 
make that speech. I very particularly desire it.” 

‘Oh, it is easy to say make him do it, but how 
am I to make him?” 

“It is perfectly easy; I have thought it all out.” 

She then went into the details. At length Mr. 
Buckstone said: 

‘‘T see now. I can manage it, I am sure. In- 
deed, I wonder he never thought of it himself— 
there are no end of precedents. But how is this 
going to benefit you, after I have managed it? 
There is where the mystery lies.” 

‘But I will take care of that. It will benefit me 
a great deal.” 

“T only wish I could see how; it is the oddest 
freak. You seem to go the furthest around to get 
at a thing—but you are in earnest, aren’t you?” 

‘“Yes, I am, indeed.” 

‘Very well, I will do it—but why not tell me 
how you imagine it is going to help you?” 

‘“‘T will, by and by. Now there is nobody talk- 
ing to him. Go straight and do it, there’s a good 
fellow.” 

A moment or two later the two sworn friends of 
the Pension bill were talking together, earnestly, and 
seemingly unconscious of the moving throng about 
them. They talked an hour, and then Mr. Buck- 
stone came back and said: 

99 


MARK TWAIN 


“He hardly fancied it at first, but he fell in love 
with it after a bit. And we have made a compact, 
too. I am to keep his secret and he is to spare 
me, in future, when he gets ready to denounce the 
supporters of the University bill—and I can easily 
believe he will keep his word on this occasion.” 

A fortnight elapsed, and the University bill had 
gathered to itself many friends, meantime. Senator 
Dilworthy began to think the harvest was ripe. He 
conferred with Laura privately. She was able to 
tell him exactly how the House would vote. ‘There 
was a majority—the bill would pass, unless weak 
members got frightened at the last, and deserted—a 
thing pretty likely to occur. The Senator said: 

“I wish we had one more good strong man. 
Now Trollop ought to be on our side, for he is a 
friend of the negro. But he is against us, and is 
our bitterest opponent. If he would simply vote 
No, but keep quiet and not molest us, I would feel 
perfectly cheerful and content. But perhaps there 
is no use in thinking of that.” 

‘Why, I laid a little plan for his benefit two weeks 
ago. I think he will be tractable, maybe. He is to 
come here to-night.” ; 

““Look out for him, my child! He means mis- 
chief, sure. It is said that he claims to know of 
improper practices having been used in the interest 
of this bill, and he thinks he sees a chance to make 
a great sensation when the bill comes up. Be wary. 
Be very, very careful, my dear. Do your very 
ablest talking, now. You can convince a man of 
anything, when you try. You must convince him 

100 


TES GILDED AGE 


that if anything improper has been done, you at 
least are ignorant of it and sorry for it. And if you 
could only persuade him out of his hostility to the 
bill, too—but don’t overdo the thing; don’t seem 
too anxious, dear.”’ 

“I won't; I'll be ever so careful. I'll talk as 
sweetly to him as if he were my own child! You 
may trust me—indeed, you may.”’ 

The door-bell rang. 

‘“That is the gentleman now,’’ said Laura. Senator 
Dilworthy retired to his study. 

Laura welcomed Mr. Trollop, a grave, carefully 
dressed, and very respectable-looking man, with a 
bald head, standing collar, and old-fashioned watch- 
seals. 

‘‘Promptness is a virtue, Mr. Trollop, and I per- 
ceive that you have it. You are always prompt 
with me.”’ 

“IT always meet my engagements, of every kind, 
Miss Hawkins.”’ 

“It is a quality which is rarer in the world than it 
has been, I believe. I wished to see you on busi- 
ness, Mr. Trollop.”’ 

‘I judged so. What can I do for you?” 

“You know my bill—the Knobs University bill?” 

‘‘Ah, I believe it zs your bill. I had forgotten. 
Yes, I know the bill.” 

‘Well, would you mind telling me your opinion 
of ite” 

‘‘Indeed, since you seem to ask it without re- 
serve, I am obliged to say that I do not regard it 
favorably. I have not seen the bill itself, but from 

IOI 


MARK TWAIN 


what I can hear, it—it—well, it has a bad look 
Aetceit Lt— - 

“Speak it out—never fear.”’ 

‘Well, it—they say it contemplates a fraud upon 
the government.” 

‘Well?’ said Laura tranquilly. 

“Well! J say ‘Well?’ too.” 

‘Well, suppose it were a fraud—which I feel 
able to deny—would it be the first one?”’ 

““You take a body’s breath away! Would you— 
did you wish me to vote for it? Was that what you 
wanted to see me about?” 

‘Your instinct is correct. I did want you—I 
do want you to vote for it.” 

“Vote for a fr—for a measure which is generally 
believed to be at least questionable? JI am afraid 
we cannot come to an understanding, Miss Haw- 
kins.”’ 

‘“‘No, I am afraid not—if you have resumed your 
principles, Mr. Trollop.”’ 

‘“‘Did you send for me merely to insult me? It 
is time for me to take my leave, Miss Hawkins.” 

‘‘No—wait a moment. Don’t be offended at a 
trifle. Do not be offish and unsociable. The 
Steamship Subsidy bill was a fraud on the govern- 
ment. You voted for it, Mr. Trollop, though you 
always opposed the measure until after you had an 
interview one evening with a certain Mrs. McCarter 
at her house. She was my agent. She was acting 
for me. Ah, that is right—sit down again. You 
can be sociable, easily enough, if you have a mind 
to. Well? Iam waiting. Have you nothing to say?”’ 

102 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Miss Hawkins, I voted for that bill because 
when I came to examine into it—”’ 

‘‘Ah, yes. When you came to examine into it. 
Well, I only want you to examine into my bill. Mr. 
Trollop, you would not sell your vote on that sub- 
sidy bill—which was perfectly right—but you ac- 
cepted of some of the stock, with the understanding 
that it was to stand in your brother-in-law’s name.”’ 

‘“There is no pr—I mean, this is utterly ground- 
less, Miss Hawkins.’’ But the gentleman seemed 
somewhat uneasy, nevertheless. 

‘‘Well, not entirely so, perhaps. I and a person 
whom we will call Miss Blank (never mind the real 
name) were in a closet at your elbow all the while.” 

Mr. Trollop winced—then he said with dignity: 

‘“Miss Hawkins, is it possible that you were 
capable of such a thing as that?’ 

“Tt was bad; I confess that. It was bad. AIl- 
most as bad as selling one’s vote for—but I forget; 
you did not sell your vote—you only accepted a 
little trifle, a small token of esteem, for your brother- 
in-law. Oh, let us come out and be frank with each 
other. I know you, Mr. Trollop. I have met you 
on business three or four times; true, I never offered 
to corrupt your principles—never hinted such a 
thing; but always when I had finished sounding 
you, I manipulated you through an agent. Let us 
be frank. Wear this comely disguise of virtue be- 
fore the public—it will count there; but here it is 
out of place. My dear sir, by and by there is going 
to be an investigation into that National Internal 
Improvement Directors’ Relief Measure of a few 

103 


MARK TWAIN 


years ago, and you know very well that you will bea 
crippled man, as likely as not, when it is com- 
pleted.”’ 

“‘It cannot be shown that a man is a knave merely 
for owning that stock. I am not distressed about 
the National Improvement Relief Measure.’’ 

‘“‘Oh, indeed, I am not trying to distress you. I 
only wished to make good my assertion that I knew 
you. Several of you gentlemen bought of that 
stock (without paying a penny down), received 
dividends from it (think of the happy idea of re- 
ceiving dividends, and very large ones, too, from 
stock one hasn’t paid for!), and all the while your 
mames never appeared in the transaction; if ever 
you took the stock at all, you took it in other 
people’s names. Now, you see, you had to know 
one of two things; namely, you either knew that 
the idea of all this preposterous generosity was to 
bribe you into future legislative friendship, or you 
didn’t know it. That is to:say, you had to be either 
a knave or a—well, a fool—there was no middle 
ground. You are not a fool, Mr. Trollop.” 

““Miss Hawkins, you flatter me. But, seriously, 
you do not forget that some of the best and purest 
men in Congress took that stock in that way?” 

“Did Senator Blank?” 

‘Well, no—I believe not.” 

““Of course you believe not. Do you suppose he 
was ever approached on the subject?” 

“Perhaps not.” 

“If you had approached him, for instance, forti- 
fied with the fact that some of the best men in 

104 


THE GILDED AGE 


Congress, and the purest, etc., etc., what would have 
been the result?” 

‘*Well, what would have been the result ?”’ 

‘He would have shown you the door! For Mr. 
Blank is neither a knave nor a fool. There are 
other men in the Senate and the House whom no 
one would have been hardy enough to approach with 
that Relief stock in that peculiarly generous way, 
but they are not of the class that you regard as the 
best and purest. No, I say I know you, Mr. Trollop. 
That is to say, one may suggest a thing to Mr. 
Trollop which it would not do to suggest to Mr. 
Blank. Mr. Trollop, you are pledged to support 
the Indigent Congressmen’s Retroactive Appropria- 
tion which is to come up, either in this or the next 
session. You do not deny that, even in public. 
The man that will vote for that bill will break the 
eighth commandment in any other way, sir!’ 

“But he will not vote for your corrupt measure, 
nevertheless, madam!” exclaimed Mr. Trollop, rising 
from his seat in a passion. 

““Ah, but he will. Sit down again, and let me 
explain why. Oh, come, don’t behave so. It is 
very unpleasant. Now be good, and you shall have 
the missing page of your great speech. Here it is!” 
—and she displayed a sheet of manuscript. 

Mr. Trollop turned immediately back from the 
threshold. It might have been gladness that flashed 
into his face; it might have been something else; but, 
at any rate, there was much astonishment mixed 
with it. 

‘Good! Where did you get it? Give it me!” 


105 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“‘Now there is no hurry. Sit down; sit down and 
let us talk and be friendly.”’ 

The gentleman wavered. Then he said: 

‘No, this is only a subterfuge. I will go. It is 
not the missing page.”’ 

Laura tore off a couple of lines from the bottom 
of the sheet. 

“Now,” she said, ‘“‘you will know whether this 
is the handwriting or not. You know it is the hand- 
writing. Now, if you will listen, you will know that 
this must be the list of statistics which was to be 
the ‘nub’ of your great effort, and the accompany- 
ing blast the beginning of the burst of eloquence 
which was continued on the next page—and you 
will recognize that there was where you broke down.” 

She read the page. Mr. Trollop said: 

““This is perfectly astounding. Still, what is all 
this to me? It is nothing. It does not concern 
me. ‘The speech is made, and there an end. I did 
break down for a moment, and in a rather uncom- 
fortable place, since I had led up to those statistics 
with some grandeur; the hiatus was pleasanter to 
the House and the galleries than it was to me. But 
it is no matter now. A week has passed; the jest 
about it ceased three or four days ago. The whole 
thing is a matter of indifference to me, Miss Haw- 
kins.” 

“But you apologized, and promised the statistics 
for next day. Why didn’t you keep your promise?”’ 

“The matter was not of sufficient consequence. 
The time was gone by to produce an effect with 
(Hale) oust 

106 


THE GILDED AGE 


“But I hear that other friends of the Soldiers’ 
Pension bill desire them very much. I think you 
ought to let them have them.” 

‘“Miss Hawkins, this silly blunder of my copyist 
evidently has more interest for you than it has for 
me. I will send my private secretary to you and let 
him discuss the subject with you at length.” 

‘‘Did he copy your speech for you?”’ 

‘“Of course he did. Why all these questions? 
Tell me—how did you get hold of that page of 
manuscript? That is the only thing that stirs a 
passing interest in my mind.” 

‘I’m coming to that.’’ Then she said, much as 
if she were talking to herself: ‘‘It does seem like 
taking a deal of unnecessary pains, for a body to 
hire another body to construct a great speech for 
him and then go and get still another body to copy 
it before it can be read in the House.”’ 

‘“Miss Hawkins, what do you mean by such talk 
as that?”’ 

‘‘Why, I am sure I mean no harm—no harm to 
anybody in the world. I am certain that I over- 
heard the Hon. Mr. Buckstone either promise to 
write your great speech for you or else get some 
other competent person to do it.” 

‘This is perfectly absurd, madam, perfectly ab- 
surd!’ and Mr. Trollop affected a laugh of derision. 

‘Why, the thing has occurred before now. I 
mean that I have heard that Congressmen have 
sometimes hired literary grubs to build speeches for 
them. Now, didn’t I overhear a conversation like 
that I spoke of?” 

107 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“Pshaw! Why, of course, you may have over- 
heard some such jesting nonsense. But would one 
be in earnest about so farcical a thing?” 

“Well, if it was only a joke, why did you make 
a serious matter of it? Why did you get the speech 
written for you, and then read it in the House with- 
out ever having it copied?’’ 

Mr. Trollop did not laugh this time; he seemed 
seriously perplexed. He said: 

““Come, play out your jest, Miss Hawkins. I 
can’t understand what you are contriving—but it 
seems to entertain you—so please go on.”’ 

“‘I will, I assure you; but I hope to make the 
matter entertaining to you, too. Your private 
secretary never copied your speech.” 

“Indeed? Really you seem to know my affairs 
better than I do myself.” 

“I believe I do. You can’t name your own 
amanuensis, Mr. Jrollop.” 

‘That is sad,indeed. Perhaps Miss Hawkins can?” 

“Yes, I can. JI wrote your speech myself, and 
you read it from my manuscript. There, now!”’ 

Mr. Trollop did not spring to his feet and smite 
his brow with his hand while a cold sweat broke 
out all over him and the color forsook his face— 
no, he only said, ‘‘Great God!”’ and looked greatly 
astonished. 

Laura handed him her commonplace-book and 
called his attention to the fact that the handwriting 
there and the handwriting of this speech were the 
same. He was shortly convinced. He laid the 
book aside and said, composedly : 

108 


THE GILDED AGE 


““Well, the wonderful tragedy is done, and it 
transpires that I am indebted to you for my late 
eloquence. What of it? What was all this for, 
and what does it amount to, after all? What do 
you propose to do about it?” 

“Oh, nothing. It is only a bit of pleasantry. 
When I overheard that conversation I took an early 
opportunity to ask Mr. Buckstone if he knew of 
anybody who might want a speech written—I had 
a friend, and so forth and so on. I was the friend, 
myself; I thought I might do you a good turn then 
and depend on you to do me one by and by. I 
never let Mr. Buckstone have the speech till the last 
moment, and when you hurried off to the House 
with it, you did not know there was a missing page, 
of course, but I did.” 

‘‘And now perhaps you think that if I refuse to 
support your bill, you will make a grand exposure?”’ 

“Well, I had not thought of that. I only kept 
back the page for the mere fun of the thing; but 
since you mention it, I don’t know but I might do 
something if I were angry.”’ 

‘‘My dear Miss Hawkins, if you were to give out 
that you composed my speech, you know very well 
that people would say it was only your raillery, 
your fondness for putting a victim in the pillory 
and amusing the public at his expense. It is too 
flimsy, Miss Hawkins, for a person of your fine in- 
ventive talent—contrive an abler device than that. 
Come!”’ 

“Tt is easily done, Mr. Trollop. I will hire a 
man, and pin this page on his breast, and label it, 

109 


MARK TWAIN 


“The Missing Fragment of the Hon. Mr. Trollop’s 
Great Speech—which speech was written and com- 
posed by Miss Laura Hawkins under a secret under- 
standing for one hundred dollars—and the money 
has not been paid.’ And I will pin round about it 
notes in my handwriting, which I will procure from 
prominent friends of mine for the occasion; also your 
printed speech in the Globe, showing the connection 
between its bracketed hiatus and my Fragment; and 
I give you my word of honor that I will stand that 
human bulletin-board in the rotunda of the Capitol 
and make him stay there a week! You see you are 
premature, Mr. Trollop, the wonderful tragedy is 
not done yet, by any means. Come, now, doesn’t 
it improve?” 

Mr. Trollop opened his eyes rather widely at this 
novel aspect of the case. He got up and walked 
the floor and gave himself a moment for reflection. 
Then he stopped and studied Laura’s face awhile, 
and ended by saying: 

‘Well, I am obliged to believe you would be 

reckless enough to do that.” 
. “Then don’t put me to the test, Mr. Trollop. 
But let’s drop the matter. JI have had my joke and 
you’ve borne the infliction becomingly enough. It 
spoils a jest to harp on it after one has had 
one’s laugh. I would much rather talk about my 
[oil 

‘‘So would I, now, my clandestine amanuensis. 
Compared with some other subjects, even your bill 
is a pleasant topic to discuss.” 

‘Very good, indeed! I thought I could per- 


IIo 


THE GILDED AGE 


suade you. Now I am sure you will be generous 
to the poor negro and vote for that bill.”’ 

‘“Yes, I feel more tenderly toward the oppressed 
colored man than I did. Shall we bury the hatchet 
and be good friends and respect each other’s little 
secrets, on condition that I vote Aye on the 
measure?” 

“With all my heart, Mr. Trollop. I give you my 
word of that.’ 

“Tt is a bargain. But isn’t there something else 
you could give me, too?” 

Laura looked at him inquiringly a moment, and 
then she comprehended. 

‘‘Oh, yes! You may have it now. I haven’t 
any more use for it.’”’ She picked up the page of 
manuscript, but she reconsidered her intention of 
handing it to him, and said, ‘“‘But never mind; I 
will keep it close; no one shall see it; you shall have 
it as soon as your vote is recorded.”’ 

Mr. Trollop looked disappointed, but presently 
made his adieux, and had got as far as the hall, when 
something occurred to Laura. She said to herself, 
‘“‘T don’t simply want his vote, under compulsion— 
he might vote Aye, but work against the bill in 
secret, for revenge; that man is unscrupulous enough 
to do anything. I must have his hearty co-operation 
as well as his vote. There is only one way to get 
phat.” 

She called him back, and said: 

“I value your vote, Mr. Trollop, but I value 
your influence more. You are able to help a meas- 
ure along in many ways, if you choose. I want 

Ifttl 


MARK TWAIN 


to ask you to work for the bill as well as vote 
for it.” 

“It takes so much of one’s time, Miss Hawkins— 
and time is money, you know.” 

““Yes, I know it is—especially in Congress. Now 
there is no use in you and I dealing in pretenses and 
going at matters in roundabout ways. We know 
each other—disguises are nonsense. Let us be 
plain. I will make it an object to you to work for 
the bill.” 

‘‘Don’t make it unnecessarily plain, please. 
There are little proprieties that are best preserved. 
What do you propose?” 

‘‘Well, this.”’ She mentioned the names of sev- 
eral prominent Congressmen. “Now,” said she, 
‘‘these gentlemen are to vote and work for the bill, 
simply out of love for the negro—and out of pure 
generosity I have put in a relative of each as a 
member of the university incorporation. ‘They will 
handle a million or so of money, officially, but will 
receive no salaries. A larger number of statesmen 
are to vote and work for the bill—also out of love 
for the negro—gentlemen of but moderate influ- 
ence, these—and out of pure generosity I am to 
see that relatives of theirs have positions in the 
university, wth salaries, and good ones, too. You 
will vote and work for the bill, from mere affection 
for the negro, and I desire to testify my gratitude 
becomingly. Make free choice. Have you any 
friend whom you would like to present with a sal- 
aried or unsalaried position in our institution?” 

‘*Well, I have a brother-in-law—”’ 

Ii2 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘“That same old brother-in-law, you good un- 
selfish provider! I have heard of him often, through 
my agents. How regularly he does ‘turn up,’ to 
be sure. He could deal with those millions virtu- 
ously, and withal with ability, too—but, of course, 
you would rather he had a salaried position?”’ 

‘‘Oh, no,” said the gentleman, facetiously, “‘we 
are very humble, very humble in our desires; we 
want no money; we labor solely for our country 
and require no reward but the luxury of an applaud- 
ing conscience. Make him one of those poor hard- 
working unsalaried corporators, and let him do 
everybody good with those millions—and go hungry 
himself! I will try to exert a little influence in 
favor of the bill.” 

Arrived at home, Mr. Trollop sat down and 
thought it all over—something after this fashion: 
it is about the shape it might have taken if he had 
spoken it aloud. 

‘“My reputation is getting a little damaged, and I 
meant to clear it up brilliantly with an exposure of 
this bill at the supreme moment, and ride back into 
Congress on the éclat of it; and if I had that bit of 
manuscript, I would do it yet. It would be more 
money in my pocket, in the end, than my brother- 
in-law will get out of that incorporatorship, fat as it 
is. But that sheet of paper is out of my reach— 
she will never let that get out of her hands. And 
what a mountain it is! It blocks up my road, com- 
pletely. She was going to hand it to me, once. 
Why didn’t she! Must be a deep woman. Deep 
devil! That is what she is; a beautiful devil—and 

1m 


MARK TWAIN 


perfectly fearless, too. The idea of her pinning 
that paper on a man and standing him up in the 
rotunda looks absurd at a first glance. But she 
would do it! She is capable of doing anything. I 
went there hoping she would try to bribe me—good 
solid capital that would be in the exposure. Well, 
my prayer was answered; she did try to bribe me; 
and I made the best of a bad bargain and let her. I 
am checkmated. I must contrive something fresh 
to get back to Congress on. Very well; a bird in 
the hand is worth two in the bush; I will work for 
the bill—the incorporatorship will be a very good 
thing.”’ 

As soon as Mr. Trollop had taken his leave, 
Laura ran to Senator Dilworthy and began to speak, 
but he interrupted her and said distressfully, with- 
out even turning from his writing to look at her: 

“Only half an hour! You gave it up early, child. 
However, it was best, it was best—I’m sure it was 
best—and safest.” 

“Give it up! I!” 

The Senator sprang up, all aglow: 

‘“My child, you can’t mean that you—” 

‘‘T’ve made him promise on honor to think about 
a compromise to-night and come and tell me his 
decision in the morning.” 

““Good! There’s hope yet that—’’ 

‘“‘Nonsense, uncle. I’ve made him engage to let 
the Tennessee Land bill utterly alone!” 

“Impossible! You—” 

‘‘I’ve made him promise to vove with us!” 

“‘INCREDIBLE! Abso—” 

114 


‘te GILDED AGE 


‘I’ve made him swear that he’ll work for us!” 

““PRE—POSTEROUS! Utterly pre—break a 
window, child, before I suffocate!’ 

“No matter, it’s true anyway. Now we can 
march into Congress with drums beating and colors 
flying!” 

““Well—well—well. I’m sadly bewildered, sadly 
bewildered. I can’t understand it at all—the most 
extraordinary woman that ever—it’s a great day, 
it’s a great day. There—there—let me put my 
hand in benediction on this precious head. Ah, 
my child, the poor negro will bless—”’ 

“‘Oh, bother the poor negro, uncle! Put it in 
your speech. Good night, good-by—we’ll marshal 
our forces and march with the dawn!” 

Laura reflected awhile, when she was alone, and 
then fell to laughing, peacefully. 

‘‘Everybody works for me,’’—so ran her thought. 
“It was a good idea to make Buckstone lead Mr. 
Trollop on to get a great speech written for him; 
and it was a happy part of the same idea for me to 
copy the speech after Mr. Buckstone had written it, 
and then keep back a page. Mr. B. was very compli- 
mentary to me when Trollop’s breakdown in the 
House showed him the object of my mysterious 
scheme; I think he will say still finer things when I 
tell him the triumph the sequel to it has gained for 
us. 

‘“But what a coward the man was, to believe I 
would have exposed that page in the rotunda, and 
so exposed myself. However, I don’t know—I 
don’t know. I will think a moment. Suppose he 

115 


MARK TWAIN 


voted No; suppose the bill failed; that is to suppose 
this stupendous game lost forever, that I have played 
so desperately for; suppose people came around 
pitying me—odious! And he could have saved me 
by his single voice. Yes, I would have exposed 
him! What would I care for the talk that that 
would have made about me when I was gone to 
Europe with Selby and all the world was busy with 
my history and my dishonor? It would be almost 
happiness to spite somebody at such a time.” 


CHAPTER XII 
NEWSPAPERS ATTACK THE UNIVERSITY BILL 


“Tkkaké gidiamuttu Wamallitakoanti likissitu anissia ukun- 
naria ni rubu kurru naussa abbanu aboahtiddunnua namonnua.”’ 


HE very next day, sure enough, the campaign 

opened. In due course, the Speaker of the 
House reached that order of business which is termed 
‘‘Notices of Bills,’ and then the Hon. Mr. Buck- 
stone rose in his place and gave notice of a bill ‘“*To 
Found and Incorporate the Knobs Industrial Uni- 
versity,’’ and then sat down without saying anything 
further. The busy gentlemen in the reporters’ gal- 
lery jotted a line in their note-books, ran to the tele- 
graphic desk in a room which communicated with 
their own writing-parlor, and then hurried back to 
their places in the gallery; and by the time they 
had resumed their seats, the line which they had de- 
livered to the operator had been read in telegraphic 
offices in towns and cities hundreds of miles away. 
It was distinguished by frankness of language as 
well as by brevity: 

The child is born. Buckstone gives notice of the thieving 
Knobs University job. It is said the noses have been counted, 
and enough votes have been bought to pass it. 

For some time the correspondents had been post- 
ing their several journals upon the alleged disreputa- 

ry 


MARK TWAIN 


ble nature of the bill, and furnishing daily reports 
of the Washington gossip concerning it. So the 
next morning, nearly every newspaper of character 
in the land assailed the measure and hurled broad- 
sides of invective at Mr. Buckstone. The Washing- 
ton papers were more respectful, as usual—and 
conciliatory, also, as usual. They generally sup- 
ported measures, when it was possible; but when 
they could not they ‘‘deprecated’’ violent expres- 
sions of opinion in other journalistic quarters. They 
always deprecated, when there was trouble ahead. 

However, The Washington Daily Love-Feast hailed 
the bill with warm approbation. ‘This was Senator 
Balaam’s paper—or, rather, ‘‘Brother’’ Balaam, as 
he was popularly called, for he had been a clergy- 
man, in his day; and he himself and all that he did 
still emitted an odor of sanctity now that he had 
diverged into journalism and politics. He was a 
power in the Congressional prayer-meeting, and in 
all movements that looked to the spread of religion 
and temperance. His paper supported the new bill 
with gushing affection; it was a noble measure; it was 
a just measure; it was a generous measure; it was a 
pure measure, and that surely should recommend 
it in these corrupt times; and, finally, if the nature 
of the bill were not known at all, the Love-Feast 
would support it anyway, and unhesitatingly, for 
the fact that Senator Dilworthy was the originator 
of the measure was a guaranty that it contemplated 
a worthy and righteous work. 

Senator Dilworthy was so anxious to know what 
the New York papers would say about the bill, that 

118 


THE GILDED AGE 


he had arranged to have synopses of their editorials 
telegraphed to him; he could not wait for the papers 
themselves to crawl along down to Washington by a 
mail-train which has never run over a cow since the 
road was built, for the reason that it has never been 
able to overtake one. It carries the usual ‘‘cow- 
catcher’”’ in front of the locomotive, but this is mere 
ostentation. It ought to be attached to the rear 
car, where it could do some good; but instead, no 
provision is made there for the protection of the 
traveling public, and hence it is not a matter of sur- 
prise that cows so frequently climb aboard that train 
and among the passengers. 

The Senator read his despatches aloud at the 
breakfast-table. Laura was troubled beyond meas- 
ure at their tone, and said that that sort of comment 
would defeat the bill; but the Senator said: 

“Oh, not at all, not at all, my child. It is just 
what we want. Persecution is the one thing need- 
ful, now—all the other forces are secured. Give 
us newspaper persecution enough, and we are safe. 
Vigorous persecution will alone carry a bill some- 
times, dear; and when you start with a strong vote 
in the first place, persecution comes in with double 
effect. It scares off some of the weak supporters, 
true, but it soon turns strong ones into stubborn 
ones. And then, presently, it changes the tide of 
public opinion. The great public is weak-minded; 
the great public is sentimental; the great public 
always turns around and weeps for an odious mur- 
derer, and prays for him, and carries flowers to his 
prison, and besieges the governor with appeals to 

11g 


MARK TWAIN 


his clemency, as soon as the papers begin to howl for 
that man’s blood. In a word, the great putty- 
hearted public loves to ‘gush,’ and there is no such 
darling opportunity to gush as a case of persecution 
affords.” 

‘Well, uncle, dear, if your theory is right, let us 
go into raptures, for nobody can ask a heartier 
persecution than these editorials are furnishing.”’ 

“IT am not so sure of that, my daughter. I don’t 
entirely like the tone of some of these remarks. 
They lack vim, they lack venom. Here is one calls 
it a ‘questionable measure.’ Bah, there is no 
strength in that. This one is better; it calls it 
‘highway robbery.’ That sounds something like. 
But now this one seems satisfied to call it an ‘iniqui- 
tous scheme!’—‘Iniquitous’ does not exasperate 
anybody; it is weak—puerile. The ignorant will 
imagine it to be intended for a compliment. But 
this other one—the one I read last—has the true 
ring: ‘This vile, dirty effort to rob the public treas- 
ury, by the kites and vultures that now infest the 
filthy den called Congress’—that is admirable, ad- 
mirable! We must have more of that sort. But 
it will come—no fear of that; they’re not warmed 
up, yet. A week from now you'll see.” 

“Uncle, you and Brother Balaam are bosom 
friends—why don’t you get his paper to persecute 
us, too?” 

“It isn’t worth while, my daughter. His support 
doesn’t hurt a bill. Nobody reads his editorials but 
himself. But I wish the New York papers would 
talk a little plainer. It is annoying to have to wait 

I20 


tan GILDED AGE 


a week for them to warm up. I expected better 
things at their hands—and time is precious, now.” 

At the proper hour, according to his previous 
notice, Mr. Buckstone duly introduced his bill, en- 
titled “‘An Act to Found and Incorporate the Knobs 
Industrial University,’’ moved its proper reference, 
and sat down. 

The Speaker of the House rattled off this ob- 
servation: 

‘’Fnobjectionbilltakuzhlcourssoreferred!”’ 

Habitués of the House comprehended that this 
long, lightning-heeled word signified that if there 
was no objection, the bill would take the customary 
course of a measure of its nature, and be referred 
to the Committee on Benevolent Appropriations, and 
that it was accordingly so referred. Strangers 
merely supposed that the Speaker was taking a 
gargle for some affection of the throat. 

The reporters immediately telegraphed the intro- 
duction of the bill, And they added: 


The assertion that the bill will pass was premature. It is 
said that many favorers of it will desert when the storm breaks 
upon them from the public press. 


The storm came, and during ten days it waxed 
more and more violent day by day. The great 
“‘Negro University Swindle” became the one ab- 
sorbing topic of conversation throughout the Union. 
Individuals denounced it, journals denounced it, 
public meetings denounced it, the pictorial papers 
caricatured its friends, the whole nation seemed to 
be growing frantic over it. Meantime, the Washing- 

I21t 


MARK TWAIN 


ton correspondents were sending such telegrams as 
these abroad in the land: Under date of— 


SATURDAY.—‘‘ Congressmen Jex and Fluke are wavering; it is 
believed they will desert the execrable bill.” 

Monpay.—“ Jex and Fluke have deserted!’’ 

THuRSDAY.—“Tubbs and Huffy left the sinking ship last. 
night.” 


Later on: 


Three desertions. The University thieves are getting 
scared, though they will not own it. 


Later: 


The leaders are growing stubborn—they swear they can carry 
it, but it is now almost certain that they no longer have a 
majority! 


After a day or two of reluctant and ambiguous 
telegrams: 


Public sentiment seems changing, a trifle, in favor of the 
bill—but only a trifle. 


And still later: 


It is whispered that the Hon. Mr. Trollop has gone over 
to the pirates. It is probably a canard. Mr. Trollop has all 
along been the bravest and most efficient champion of virtue 
and the people against the bill, and the report is without doubt 
a shameless invention. 


Next day. 


With characteristic treachery, the truckling and pusillan- 
imous reptile, Crippled-Speech Trollop, has gone over to the 
enemy. It is contended, now, that he has been a friend to the 
bill, in secret, since the day it was introduced, and has had bankable 
reasons for being so; but he himself declares that he has gone 
over because the malignant persecution of the bill by the news- 


I22 


THE GILDED AGE 


papers caused him to study its provisions with more care than 
he had previously done, and this close examination revealed the 
fact that the measure is one in every way worthy of support. 
(Pretty thin!) It cannot be denied that this desertion has had 
a damaging effect. Jex and Fluke have returned to their 
iniquitous allegiance, with six or eight others of lesser caliber, 
and it is reported and believed that Tubbs and Huffy are ready 
to go back. It is feared that the University swindle is stronger 
to-day than it has ever been before. 


Later—midnight: 


It is said that the committee will report the bill back to- 
morrow. Both sides are marshaling their forces, and the fight 
on this bill is evidently going to be the hottest of the session. 
All Washington is boiling. 


CHAPTER XIII 
PHILIP SHOWS HIS FRIENDSHIP FOR BRIERLY 


Capienda rebus in malis preeceps via est. Seneca, 


Et enim ipsi se impellunt, ubi semel a ratione discessum est: 
ipsaque sibi imbecillitas indulget, in altumque provehitur im- 
prudenter: nec reperit locum consistendi. Cicero, 


“| T’S easy enough for another fellow to talk,” said 
Harry, despondingly, after he had put Philip 
in possession of his view of the case. ‘‘It’s easy 
enough to say “give her up,’ if you don’t care for 
her. What am I going to do to give her up?” 

It seemed to Harry that it was a situation requir- 
ing some active measures. He couldn’t realize that 
he had fallen hopelessly in love without some rights 
accruing to him for the possession of the object of 
his passion. Quiet resignation under relinquishment 
ot anything he wanted was not in his line. And 
when it appeared to him that his surrender of Laura 
would be the withdrawal of the one barrier that kept 
her from ruin, it was unreasonable to expect that he 
could see how to give her up. 

Harry had the most buoyant confidence in his 
own projects always; he saw everything connected 
with himself in a large way and in rosy hues. This 
predominance of the imagination over the judgment 
gave that appearance of exaggeration to his conver- 

124 


THE GILDED AGE 


sation and to his communications with regard to 
himself, which sometimes conveyed the impression 
that he was not speaking the truth. His acquaint- 
ances had been known to say that they invariably 
allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements, and 
held the other half under advisement for confirma- 
tion. 

Philip in this case could not tell from Harry’s 
story exactly how much encouragement Laura had 
given him, nor what hopes he might justly have of 
winning her. He had never seen him desponding 
before. The ‘‘brag’’ appeared to be all taken out 
of him, and his airy manner only asserted itself now 
and then in a comical imitation of its old self. 

Philip wanted time to look about him before he 
decided what to do. He was not familiar with 
Washington, and it was difficult to adjust his feel- 
ings and perceptions to its peculiarities. Coming 
out of the sweet sanity of the Bolton household, 
this was by contrast the maddest Vanity Fair one 
could conceive. It seemed to him a feverish un- 
healthy atmosphere in which lunacy would be easily 
developed. He fancied that everybody attached to 
himself an exaggerated importance, from the fact of 
being at the national capital, the center of political 
influence, the fountain of patronage, preferment, 
jobs, and opportunities. 

People were introduced to each other as from this 
or that state, not from cities or towns, and this gave 
a largeness to their representative feeling. All the 
women talked politics as naturally and glibly as they 
talk fashion or literature elsewhere. There was 

125 


MARK TWAIN 


always some exciting topic at the Capitol, or some 
huge slander was rising up like a miasmatic exhala- 
tion from the Potomac, threatening to settle no one 
knew exactly where. Every other person was an 
aspirant for a place, or, if he had one, for a better 
place, or more pay; almost every other one had 
some claim or interest or remedy to urge; even the 
women were all advocates for the advancement of 
some person, and they violently espoused or de- 
nounced this or that measure as it would affect some 
relative, acquaintance, or friend. 

Love, travel, even death itself, waited on the 
chances of the dies daily thrown in the two Houses, 
and the committee-rooms there. If the measure 
went through, love could afford to ripen into mar- 
riage, and longing for foreign travel would have 
fruition; and it must have been only eternal hope 
springing in the breast that kept alive numerous old 
claimants who for years and years had besieged the 
doors of Congress, and who looked as if they needed 
not so much an appropriation of money as six feet 
of ground. And those who stood so long waiting for 
success to bring them death were usually those who 
had a just claim. 

Representing states and talking of national and 
even international affairs, as familiarly as neighbors 
at home talk of poor crops and the extravagance of 
their ministers, was likely at first to impose upon 
Philip as to the importance of the people gathered 
here. 

There was a little newspaper editor from Phil’s 
native town, the assistant on a Peddletonian weekly, 

126 


THE GILDED AGE 


who made his little annual joke about the ‘‘first egg 
laid on our table,’’ and who was the menial of every 
tradesman in the village and under bonds to him for 
frequent ‘“‘puffs,’’ except the undertaker, about 
whose employment he was recklessly facetious. In 
Washington he was an important man, correspond- 
ent, and clerk of two House committees, a ‘‘worker’”’ 
in politics, and a confident critic of every woman 
and every man in Washington. He would be a con- 
sul, no doubt, by and by, at some foreign port, of 
the language of which he was ignorant; though if 
ignorance of language were a qualification he might 
have been a consul at home. His easy familiarity 
with great men was beautiful to see, and when Philip 
learned what a tremendous underground influence 
this little ignoramus had, he no longer wondered 
at the queer appointments and the queerer legis- 
lation. 

Philip was not long in discovering that people in 
Washington did not differ much from other people; 
they had the same meannesses, generosities, and 
tastes. A Washington boarding-house had the odor 
of a boarding-house the world over. 

Colonel Sellers was as unchanged as any one 
Philip saw whom he had known elsewhere. Wash- 
ington appeared to be the native element of this 
man. His pretensions were equal to any he en- 
countered there. He saw nothing in its society that 
equaled that of Hawkeye; he sat down to no table 
that could not be unfavorably contrasted with his 
own at home; the most airy scheme inflated in the 
hot air of the capital only reached in magnitude 

127 


MARK TWAIN 


some of his lesser fancies, the by-play of his con- 
structive imagination. 

“The country is getting along very well,” he said 
to Philip, ‘“but our public men are too timid. What 
we want is more money. I’ve told Boutwell so. 
Talk about basing the currency on gold; you 
might as well base it on pork. Gold is only one 
product. Base it on everything! You’ve got to 
do something for the West. How am I to move 
my crops? We must have improvements. Grant’s 
got the idea. We want a canal from the James 
River to the Mississippi. Government ought to 
build it.” 

It was difficult to get the Colonel off from these 
large themes when he was once started, but Philip 
brought the conversation round to Laura and her 
reputation in the city. 

““No,” he said, ‘‘I haven’t noticed much. We've 
been so busy about this university. It will make 
Laura rich with the rest of us, and she has done 
nearly as much as if she were a man. She has great 
talent, and will make a big match. I see the foreign 
ministers and that sort after her. Yes, there is talk, 
always will be about a pretty woman so much in 
public as she is. Tough stories come to me, but I 
put ’em away. ‘Tain’t likely one of Si Hawkins’s 
children would do that—for she is the same as a child 
of his. I told her, though, to go slow,’’ added the 
Colonel, as if that mysterious admonition from him 
would set everything right. 

‘Do you know anything about a Colonel Selby?” 

“Know all about him. Fine fellow. But he’s 

128 


THE GILDED AGE 


got a wife; and I told him, as a friend, he’d better 
sheer off from Laura. I reckon he thought better 
er 1. and did.”’ 

But Philip was not long in learning the truth. 
Courted as Laura was by a certain class and still ad- 
mitted into society, that, nevertheless, buzzed with 
disreputable stories about her, she had lost character 
with the best people. Her intimacy with Selby was 
open gossip, and there were winks and thrustings of 
the tongue in any group of men when she passed 
by. It was clear enough that Harry’s delusion must 
be broken up, and that no such feeble obstacle as 
his passion could interpose would turn Laura from 
her fate. Philip determined to see her, and put 
himself in possession of the truth, as he suspected 
it, in order to show Harry his folly. 

Laura, after her last conversation with Harry, had 
a new sense of her position. She had noticed before 
the signs of a change in manner toward her, a little 
less respect perhaps from men, and an avoidance by 
women. She had attributed this latter partly to 
jealousy of her, for no one is willing to acknowledge 
a fault in himself when a more agreeable motive can 
be found for the estrangement of his acquaintances. 
But, now, if society had turned on her, she would 
defy it. It was not in her nature to shrink. She 
knew she had been wronged, and she knew that she 
had no remedy. 

What she heard of Colonel Selby’s proposed de- 
parture alarmed her more than anything else, and 
she calmly determined that if he was deceiving her 
the second time it should be the last. Let society 

120 


MARK TWAIN 


finish the tragedy if it liked; she was indifferent 
what came after. At the first opportunity, she 
charged Selby with his intention to abandon her. 
He unblushingly denied it. He had not thought of 
going to Europe. He had only been amusing him- 
self with Sellers’s schemes. He swore that as soon 
as she succeeded with her bill, he would fly with her 
to any part of the world. | 

She did not quite believe him, for she saw that 
he feared her, and she began to suspect that his 
were the protestations of a coward to gain time. But 
she showed him no doubts. She only watched his 
movements day by day, and always held herself 
ready to act promptly. 

When Philip came into the presence of this attract- 
ive woman, he could not realize that she was the 
subject of all the scandal he had heard. She re- 
ceived him with quite the old Hawkeye openness 
and cordiality, and fell to talking at once of their 
little acquaintance there; and it seemed impossible 
that he could ever say to her what he had come 
determined to say. Such a man as Philip has only 
one standard by which to judge women. 

Laura recognized that fact, no doubt. The better 
part of her woman’s nature saw it. Such a man 
might, years ago, not now, have changed her nature, 
and made the issue of her life so different, even after 
her cruel abandonment. She had a dim feeling of 
this, and she would like now to stand well with him. 
The spark of truth and honor that was left in her 
was elicited by his presence. It was this influence 
that governed her conduct in this interview. 

130 


THE GILDED AGE 


’ 


‘‘T have come,” said Philip in his direct manner, 
‘‘from my friend Mr. Brierly. You are not ignorant 
of his feeling toward you?” 

‘Perhaps not.”’ 

‘‘But perhaps you do not know, you who have 
so much admiration, how sincere and overmastering 
his love is for you?” Philip would not have spoken 
so plainly, if he had in mind anything except to 
draw from Laura something that would end Harry’s 
passion. 

‘‘And is sincere love so rare, Mr. Sterling?’ 
asked Laura, moving her foot a little, and speaking 
with a shade of sarcasm. 

‘Perhaps not in Washington,” replied Philip, 
tempted into a similar tone. ‘‘Excuse my blunt- 
ness,” he continued, ‘‘but would the knowledge of 
his love, would his devotion, make any difference to 
you in your Washington life?” 

“In respect to what?’’ asked Laura quickly. 

‘‘Well, to others. I won’t equivocate—to Colonel 
Selby ?”’ 

Laura’s face flushed with anger, or shame; she 
looked steadily at Philip and began: 

‘“By what right, sir—’’ 

‘‘By the right of friendship,” interrupted Philip 
stoutly. ‘‘It may matter little to you. It is every- 
thing to him. He has a Quixotic notion that you 
would turn back from what is before you for his 
sake. You cannot be ignorant of what all the city 
is talking of.” Philip said this determinedly and 
with some bitterness. 

It was a full minute before Laura spoke. Both 

134 


MARK TWAIN 


had risen, Philip as if to go, and Laura in suppressed 
excitement. When she spoke her voice was very 
unsteady, and she looked down. 

‘“Yes, I know. I perfectly understand what you 
mean. Mr. Brierly is nothing—simply nothing. 
He is a moth singed, that is all—the trifler with 
women thought he was a wasp. I have no pity for 
him, not the least. You may tell him not to make 
a fool of himself, and to keep away. I say this on 
your account, not his. You are not like him. It is 
enough for me that you want it so. Mr. Sterling,” 
she continued, looking up, and there were tears in 
her eyes that contradicted the hardness of her 
language, “‘you might not pity him if you knew my 
history; perhaps you would not wonder at some 
things you hear. No; it is useless to ask me why it 
must be so. You can’t make a life over—society 
wouldn’t let you if you would—and mine must be 
lived as it is. There, sir, I’m not offended; but it 
is useless for you to say anything more.”’ 

Philip went away with his heart lightened about 
Harry, but profoundly saddened by the glimpse of 
what this woman might have been. He told Harry 
all that was necessary of the conversation—she was 
bent on going her own way, he had not the ghost of 
a chance—he was a fool, she had said, for thinking 
he had. 

And Harry accepted it meekly, and made up his 
own mind that Philip didn’t know much about 
women. 


CHAPTER XIV 


WHY MR. BUCKSTONE SUPPORTED THE UNIVERSITY 
BILL 


—Nakila cu ch’y cu yao chike, chi ka togobah cu y vach, 
x-e u chax-cut?—Utz, chi ka ya puvak chyve, x-e cha-cu ri amag. 
Popol Vuh. 


HE galleries of the House were packed, on the 

momentous day, not because the reporting of 
an important bill back by a committee was a thing 
to be excited about, if the bill were going to take 
the ordinary course afterward; it would be like get- 
ting excited over the empaneling of a coroner’s jury 
in a murder case, instead of saving up one’s emo- 
tions for the grander occasion of the hanging of the 
accused, two years later, after all the tedious forms 
of law had been gone through with. 

But suppose you understand that this coroner’s 
jury is going to turn out to be a vigilance committee 
in disguise, who will hear testimony for an hour and 
then hang the murderer on the spot? That puts a 
different aspect upon the matter. Now it was whis- 
pered that the legitimate forms of procedure usual 
in the House, and which keep a bill hanging along 
for days, and even weeks, before it is finally passed 
upon, were going to be overruled in this case, and 
short. work made of the measure; and so, what was 

133 


MARK TWAIN 


beginning as a mere inquest might turn out to be 
something very different. 

In the course of the day’s business the order of 
‘‘Reports of Committees” was finally reached, and 
when the weary crowds. heard that glad announce- 
ment issue from the Speaker’s lips they ceased to 
fret at the dragging delay, and plucked up spirit. 
The chairman of the Committee on Benevolent Ap- 
propriations rose and made his report, and just then 
a blue-uniformed brass-mounted little page put a 
note into his hand. It was from Senator Dilworthy, 
who had appeared upon the floor of the House for 
a moment and flitted away again: 


Everybody expects a grand assault in force; no doubt you 
believe as I certainly do, that it is the thing to do; we are strong, 
and everything is hot for the contest. Trollop’s espousal of 
our cause has immensely helped us and we grow in power con- 
stantly. Ten of the opposition were called away from town 
about noon (but—so it is said—only for one day). Six others 
are sick, but expect to be about again to-morrow or next day, 
a friend tells me. A bold onslaught is worth trying. Go for 
a suspension of the rules! You will find we can swing a two- 
thirds vote—I am perfectly satisfied of it. The Lord’s truth 
will prevail. Dilworthy. 


Mr. Buckstone had reported the bills from his 
committee, one by one, leaving the bill to the last. 
When the House had voted upon the acceptance or 
rejection of the report upon all but it, and the ques- 
tion now being upon zis disposal— 

Mr. Buckstone begged that the House would give 
its attention to a few remarks which he desired to 
make. His committee had instructed him to report 
the bill favorably; he wished to explain the nature 

134 


THE GILDED AGE 


of the measure, and thus justify the committee’s 
action; the hostility roused by the press would then 
disappear, and the bill would shine forth in its true 
and noble character. He said that its provisions 
were simple. It incorporated the Knobs Industrial 
University, locating it in East Tennessee, declaring 
it open to all persons without distinction of sex, 
color, or religion, and committing its management to 
a board of perpetual trustees, with power to fill 
vacancies in their own number. It provided for the 
erection of certain buildings for the university, 
dormitories, lecture-halls, museums, libraries, labora- 
tories, workshops, furnaces, and mills. It provided 
also for the purchase of sixty-five thousand acres of 
land (fully described) for the purposes of the uni- 
versity, in the Knobs of East Tennessee. And it 
appropriated [blank] dollars for the purchase of the 
land, which should be the property of the national 
trustees in trust for the uses named. 

Every effort had been made to secure the refusal 
of the whole amount of the property of the Hawkins 
heirs in the Knobs, some seventy-five thousand 
acres, Mr. Buckstone said. But Mr. Washington 
Hawkins (one of the heirs) objected. He was, in- 
deed, very reluctant to sell any part of the land at 
any price; and, indeed, this reluctance was justifiable 
when one considers how constantly and how greatly 
the property is rising in value. 

What the South needed, continued Mr. Buck- 
stone, was skilled labor. Without that it would be 
unable to develop its mines, build its roads, work to 
advantage and without great waste its fruitful land, 

135 


MARK TWAIN 


establish manufactures or enter upon a prosperous 
industrial career. Its laborers were almost alto- 
gether unskilled. Change them into intelligent, 
trained workmen, and you increased at once the 
capital, the resources of the entire South, which 
would enter upon a prosperity hitherto unknown. 
In five years the increase in local wealth would not 
only reimburse the government for the outlay in this 
appropriation, but pour untold wealth into the 
treasury. 

This was the material view, and the least impor- 
tant in the honorable gentleman’s opinion. [Here he 
referred to some notes furnished him by Senator 
Dilworthy, and then continued.] God had given us 
the care of these colored millions. What account 
should we render to Him of our stewardship? We 
had made them free. Should we leave them igno- 
rant? We had cast them upon their own resources. 
Should we leave them without tools? We could not 
tell what the intentions of Providence are in regard 
to these peculiar people, but our duty was plain. 
The Knobs Industrial University would be a vast 
school of modern science and practice, worthy of a 
great nation. It would combine the advantages of 
Zurich, Freiburg, Creuzot, and the Sheffield Scien- 
tific. Providence had apparently reserved and set 
apart the Knobs of East Tennessee for this purpose. 
What else were they for? Was it not wonderful that 
for more than thirty years, over a generation, the 
choicest portion of them had remained in one family, 
untouched, as if consecrated for some great use! 

It might be asked why the government should buy 

136 


THE GILDED AGE 


this land, when it had millions of acres, more than 
the railroad companies desired, which it might 
devote to this purpose? He answered, that the 
government had no such tract of land as this. It 
had nothing comparable to it for the purposes of the 
university. ‘This was to be a school of mining, of 
engineering, of the working of metals, of chemistry, 
zoology, botany, manufactures, agriculture: in short, 
of all the complicated industries that make a state 
great. There was no place for the location of such 
a school like the Knobs of East Tennessee. The 
hills abounded in metals of all sorts, iron in all its 
combinations, copper, bismuth, gold and silver in 
small quantities, platinum he believed, tin, alumin- 
ium; it was covered with forests and strange plants; 
in the woods were found the coon, the opossum, 
the fox, the deer, and many other animals who 
roamed in the domain of natural history; coal 
existed in enormous quantity and no doubt oil; it 
was such a place for the practice of agricultural 
experiments that any student who had been success- 
ful there would have an easy task in any other 
portion of the country. 

No place offered equal facilities for experiments 
in mining, metallurgy, engineering. He expected 
to live to see the day when the youth of the South 
would resort to its mines, its workshops, its labora- 
tories, its furnaces and factories for practical in- 
struction in all the great industrial pursuits. 

A noisy and rather ill-natured debate followed 
now, and lasted hour after hour. The friends of 
the bill were instructed by the leaders to make no 

LS) 


MARK TWAIN 


effort to check this; it was deemed better strategy to 
tire out the opposition; it was decided to vote down 
every proposition to adjourn, and so continue the 
sitting into the night; opponents might desert, 
then, one by one and weaken their party, for they 
had no personal stake in the bill. 

Sunset came, and still the fight went on; the gas 
was lit, the crowd in the galleries began to thin, but 
the contest continued; the crowd returned, by and 
by, with hunger and thirst appeased, and aggravated 
the hungry and thirsty House by looking contented 
and comfortable; but still the wrangle lost nothing 
of its bitterness. Recesses were moved plaintively 
by the opposition, and invariably voted down by the 
university army. 

At midnight the House presented a spectacle cal- 
culated to interest a stranger. The great galleries 
were still thronged—though only with men now; 
the bright colors that had made them look lke 
hanging gardens were gone, with the ladies. The 
reporters’ gallery was merely occupied by one or 
two watchful sentinels of the quill-driving guild; 
the main body cared nothing for a debate that had 
dwindled to a mere vaporing of dull speakers and 
now and then a brief quarrel over a point of order; 
but there was an unusually large attendance of 
journalists in the reporters’ waiting-room, chatting, 
smoking, and keeping on the quz vive for the general 
irruption of the Congressional volcano that must 
come when the time was ripe for it. Senator Dil- 
worthy and Philip were in the diplomatic gallery; 
Washington sat in the public gallery, and Colonel 

138 


Tre GILDED AGE 


Sellers was not far away. ‘The Colonel had been 
flying about the corridors and buttonholing Con- 
gressmen all the evening, and believed that he had 
accomplished a world of valuable service; but fatigue 
was telling upon him now, and he was quiet and 
speechless—for once. Below, a few Senators lounged 
upon the sofas set apart for visitors, and talked with 
idle Congressmen. A dreary member was speaking; 
the presiding officer was nodding; here and there 
little knots of members stood in the aisles, whisper- 
ing together; all about the House others sat in all 
the various attitudes that express weariness; some, 
tilted back, had one or more legs disposed upon 
their desks; some sharpened pencils indolently; some 
scribbled aimlessly; some yawned and stretched; a 
great many lay upon their breasts upon the desks, 
sound asleep and gently snoring. The flooding gas- 
light from the fancifully wrought roof poured down 
upon the tranquil scene. Hardly a sound dis- 
turbed the stillness, save the monotonous eloquence 
of the gentleman who occupied the floor. Now 
and then a warrior of the opposition broke down 
under the pressure, gave it up and went home. 

Mr. Buckstone began to think it might be safe, 
now, to ‘‘proceed to business.’’? He consulted with 
Trollop and one or two others. Senator Dilworthy 
descended to the floor of the House and they went 
to meet him. After a brief comparison of notes, 
the Congressmen sought their seats and sent pages 
about the House with messages to friends. These 
latter instantly roused up, yawned, and began to 
look alert. The moment the floor was unoccupied, 

139 


MARK TWAIN 


Mr. Buckstone rose, with an injured look, and said 
it was evident that the opponents of the bill were 
merely talking against time, hoping in this unbe- 
coming way to tire out the friends of the measure 
and so defeat it. Such conduct might be respect- 
able enough in a village debating society, but it was 
trivial among statesmen, it was out of place in so 
august an assemblage as the House of Representa- 
tives of the United States. The friends of the bill 
had been not only willing that its opponents should 
express their opinions, but had strongly desired it. 
They courted the fullest and freest discussion; but 
it seemed to him that this fairness was but illy ap- 
preciated, since gentlemen were capable of taking 
advantage of it for selfish and unworthy ends. This 
trifling had gone far enough. He called for the 
question. 

The instant Mr. Buckstone sat down, the storm 
burst forth. A dozen gentlemen sprang to their 
feet. 

‘“Mr. Speaker!’ 

‘“Mr. Speaker!’’ 

‘‘Mir. Speaker!’’ 

‘Order! Order! Order! Question! Question!” 

The sharp blows of the Speaker’s gavel rose 
above the din. 

The ‘‘previous question,” that hated gag, was 
moved and carried. All debate came to a sudden 
end, of course. ‘Triumph No. 1. 

Then the vote was taken on the adoption of the 
report, and it carried by a surprising majority. 

Mr. Buckstone got the floor again and moved that 

140 


THE GILDED AGE 


the rules be suspended and the bill read a first 
time. 

Mr. Trollop—'‘Second the motion!” 

The Speaker—‘‘It is moved and—’ 

Clamor of Votces—'‘Move we adjourn! Second 
the motion! Adjourn! Adjourn! Order! Order!’ 

The Speaker (after using his gavel vigorously)— 
‘‘It is moved and seconded that the House do now 
adjourn. All those in favor—’”’ 

Voices—‘‘ Division! Division! Ayes and nays! 
Ayes and nays!” 

It was decided to vote upon the adjournment by 
ayes and nays. This was war in earnest. The ex- 
citement was furious. The galleries were in com- 
motion in an instant, the reporters swarmed to their 
places, idling members of the House flocked to their 
seats, nervous gentlemen sprang to their feet, pages 
flew hither and thither, life and animation were 
visible everywhere, all the long ranks of faces in the 
building were kindled. 

“This thing decides it!’ thought Mr. Buckstone; 
“but let the fight proceed.”’ 

The voting began, and every sound ceased but the 
calling of the names and the ‘‘Aye!’’ ‘‘No!’”’ ‘‘No!” 
“Aye!” of the responses. There was not a movement 
in the House; the people seemed to hold their breath. 

The voting ceased, and then there was an interval 
of dead silence while the clerk made up his count. 
There was a two-thirds vote on the university side— 
and two over! 

The Speaker—‘‘The rules are suspended, the mo- 
tion is carried—first reading of the bill!”’ 

141 


MARK TWAIN 


By one impulse the galleries broke forth into 
stormy applause, and even some of the members of 
the House were not wholly able to restrain their 
feelings. The Speaker’s gavel came to the rescue 
and his clear voice followed: 

“Order, gentlemen! The House will come to 
order! If spectators offend again, the Sergeant-at- 
Arms will clear the galleries!’’ 

Then he cast his eyes aloft and gazed at some 
object attentively fora moment. All eyes followed 
the direction of the Speaker’s, and then there was a 
general titter. The Speaker said: 

“‘Let the Sergeant-at-Arms inform the gentleman 
that his conduct is an infringement of the dignity of 
the House—and one which is not warranted by the 
state of the weather.” 

Poor Sellers was the culprit. He sat in the front 
seat of the gallery, with his arms and his tired body 
overflowing the balustrade—sound asleep, dead to 
all excitements, all disturbances. The fluctuations 
of the Washington weather had influenced his dreams, 
perhaps, for during the recent tempest of applause 
he had hoisted his gingham umbrella and calmly 
gone on with his slumbers. Washington Hawkins 
had seen the act, but was not near enough at hand 
to save his friend, and no one who was near enough 
desired to spoil the effect. But a neighbor stirred 
up the Colonel, now that the House had its eye 
upon him, and the great speculator furled his tent 
like the Arab. He said: 

*“Bless my soul, I’m so absent-minded when I get 
to thinking! I never wear an umbrella in the house 

142 


THE GILDED AGE 


—did anybody notice it? What—asleep? Indeed? 
And did you wake me, sir? Thank you—thank 
you very much, indeed. It might have fallen out 
of my hands and been injured. Admirable arti- 
cle, sir—present from a friend in Hongkong; one 
doesn’t come across silk like that in this country— 
it’s the real Young Hyson, I’m told.” 

By this time the incident was forgotten, for the 
House was at war again. Victory was almost in 
sight, now, and the friends of the bill threw them- 
selves into their work with enthusiasm. They soon 
moved and carried its second reading, and after a 
strong, sharp fight, carried a motion to go into com- 
mittee of the whole. The Speaker left his place, of 
course, and a chairman was appointed. 

Now the contest raged hotter than ever—for the 
authority that compels order when the House sits as 
a House, is greatly diminished when it sits as a 
committee. The main fight came upon the filling 
of the blanks with the sum to be appropriated for 
the purchase of the land, of course. 

Mr. Buckstone—‘‘Mr. Chairman, I move you, sir, 
that the words three millions of be inserted.”’ 

Mr. Hadley—‘‘Mr. Chairman, I move that the 
words two and a half dollars be inserted.” 

Mr. Clawson—‘‘Mr. Chairman, I move the in- 
sertion of the words five and twenty cents, as repre- 
senting the true value of this barren and isolated 
tract of desolation.”’ 

The question, according to rule, was taken upon 
the smallest sum first. It was lost. 

Then upon the next smallest sum. Lost also. 

143 


MARK TWAIN 


And then upon the three millions. After a vigor- 
ous battle that lasted a considerable time, this mo- 
tion was carried. | 

Then, clause by clause, the bill was read, dis- 
cussed, and amended in trifling particulars, and now 
the committee rose and reported. 

The moment the House had resumed its functions 
and received the report, Mr. Buckstone moved and 
carried the third reading of the bill. 

The same bitter war over the sum to be paid was 
fought over again, and now that the ayes and nays 
could be called and placed on record, every man 
was compelled to vote by name on the three mil- 
lions, and, indeed, on every paragraph of the bill 
from the enacting clause straight through. But, as 
before, the friends of the measure stood firm and 
voted in a solid body every time, and so did its 
enemies. 

The supreme moment was come now, but so sure 
was the result that not even a voice was raised to 
interpose an adjournment. The enemy were totally 
demoralized. The bill was put upon its final passage 
almost without dissent, and the calling of the ayes 
and nays began. When it was ended the triumph 
was complete—the two-thirds vote held good, and 
a veto was impossible, as far as the House was 
concerned ! 

Mr. Buckstone resolved that now that the nail 
was driven home, he would clinch it on the other 
side and make it stay forever. He moved a recon- 
sideration of the vote by which the bill had passed. 
The motion was lost, of course, and the great In- 

144 


ie GILDED AGE 


dustrial University act was an accomplished fact as 
far as it was in the power of the House of Repre- 
sentatives to make it so. 

There was no need to move an adjournment. The 
instant the last motion was decided, the enemies of 
the university rose and flocked out of the hall, talk- 
ing angrily, and its friends flocked after them 
jubilant and congratulatory. The galleries disgorged 
their burden, and presently the House was silent 
and deserted. 

_ When Colonel Sellers and Washington stepped out of 
the building they were surprised to find that the day- 
light was old and the sun well up. Said the Colonel: 

‘‘Give me your hand, my boy! You're all right 
at last! You’re a millionaire! At least you're 
going to be. The thing is dead sure. Don’t you 
bother about the Senate. Leave me and Dilworthy 
to take care of that. Run along home, now, and 
tell Laura. Lord, it’s magnificent news—perfectly 
magnificent! Run, now. I'll telegraph my wife. 
She must come here and help me build a house. 
Everything’s all right now!” 

Washington was so dazed by his good fortune 
and so bewildered by the gaudy pageant of dreams 
that was already trailing its long ranks through his 
brain, that he wandered he knew not where, and so 
loitered by the way that when at last he reached 
home he woke to a sudden annoyance in the fact 
that his news must be old to Laura, now, for of 
course Senator Dilworthy must have already been 
home and told her an hour before. He knocked at 
her door, but there was no answer. 

145 


MARK TWAIN 


‘That is like the Duchess,” said he. ‘‘Always 
cool. A body can’t excite her—can’t keep her 
excited, anyway. Now she has gone off to sleep 
again, as comfortably as if she were used to picking 
up a million dollars every day or two.”’ 

Then he went to bed. But he could not sleep; so 
he got up and wrote a long, rapturous letter to 
Louise, and another to his mother. And he closed 
both to much the same effect: 


Laura will be queen of America, now, and she will be ap- 
plauded and honored and petted by the whole nation. Her 
name will be in every one’s mouth more than ever, and how 
they will court her and quote her bright speeches. And mine, 
too, I suppose; though they do that more already, than they 
really seem to deserve. Oh, the world is so bright, now, and 
so cheery; the clouds are all gone, our long struggle is ended, 
our troubles are all over. Nothing can ever make us unhappy 
any more. Your dear faithful ones will have the reward of your 
patient waiting now. How father’s wisdom is proven at last! 
And how I repent me that there have been times when I lost 
faith and said the blessing he stored up for us a tedious genera- 
tion ago was but a long-drawn curse, a blight upon us all. But 
everything is well now—we are done with poverty, and toil, 
weariness and heartbreakings; all the world is filled with 
sunshine. 


CHAPTER XV 


LAURA KILLS COLONEL SELBY 


Forte 8 ]’aceto di vin dolce. 


Ne bid swyle cwénlic peaw 
idese to efnanne, 

pedh de hio senlicu sy, 
pette freodu-webbe 

feores onsxce, 

sefter lig-torne, 


leéfne mannan, 
Beowulf. 


HILIP left the Capitol and walked up Pennsyl 
vania Avenue in company with Senator Dil- 
worthy. It was a bright spring morning; the air was 
soft and inspiring; in the deepening wayside green, 
the pink flush of the blossoming peach trees, the 
soft suffusion on the heights of Arlington, and the 
breath of the warm south wind, was apparent the 
annual miracle of the resurrection of the earth. 
The Senator took off his hat and seemed to open 
his soul to the sweet influences of the morning. 
After the heat and noise of the chamber, under its 
dull gas-illuminated glass canopy, and the all-night 
struggle of passion and feverish excitement there, 
the open, tranquil world seemed like Heaven. The 
Senator was not in an exultant mood, but rather in 
a condition of holy joy, befitting a Christian states- 
147 


MARK TWAIN 


man, whose benevolent plans Providence has made 
its own and stamped with approval. The great 
battle had been fought, but the measure had still to 
encounter the scrutiny of the Senate, and Providence 
sometimes acts differently in the two Houses. Still, 
the Senator was tranquil, for he knew that there is 
an esprit de corps in the Senate which does not exist 
in the House, the effect of which is to make the 
members complaisant toward the projects of each 
other, and to extend a mutual aid which in a more 
vulgar body would be called ‘‘log-rolling.”’ 

‘“‘It is, under Providence, a good night’s work, 
Mr. Sterling. The government has founded an in- 
stitution which will remove half the difficulty from 
the Southern problem. And it is a good thing for 
the Hawkins heirs, a very good thing. Laura will 
be almost a millionaire.’” 

“Do you think, Mr. Dilworthy, that the Haw- 
kinses will get much of the money?’’ asked Philip 
innocently, remembering the fate of the Columbus 
River appropriation. 

The Senator looked at his companion scrutiniz- 
ingly for a moment to see if he meant anything 
personal, and then replied: | 

‘‘Undoubtedly, undoubtedly. I have had their 
interests greatly at heart. There will, of course, 
be a few expenses, but the widow and orphans 
will realize all that Mr. Hawkins dreamed of for 
them.” 

The birds were singing as they crossed the Presi- 
dential square, now bright with its green turf and 
tender foliage. After the two had gained the steps 

148 


THE GILDED AGE 


of the Senator’s house they stood a moment, looking 
upon the lovely prospect. 

‘It is like the peace of God,’’ said the Senator 
devoutly. 

Entering the house, the Senator called a servant 
and said: ‘‘Tell Miss Laura that we are waiting to 
see her. I ought to have sent a messenger on horse- 
back half an hour ago,’’ he added to Philip. ‘‘She 
will be transported with our victory. You must stop 
to breakfast, and see the excitement.’’ The servant 
soon came back, with a wondering look, and reported: 

‘*Miss Laura ain’t dah, sah. JI reckon she hain’t 
been dah all night.” 

The Senator and Philip both started up. In 
Laura’s room there were the marks of a confused 
and hasty departure, drawers half open, little arti- 
cles strewn on the floor. The bed had not been 
disturbed. Upon inquiry it appeared that Laura 
had not been at dinner, excusing herself to Mrs. 
Dilworthy on the plea of a violent headache; that 
she made a request to the servants that she might 
not be disturbed. 

The Senator was astounded. Philip thought at 
once of Colonel Selby. Could Laura have run away 
with him? The Senator thought not. In fact, it 
could not be. General Leffenwell, the member from 
New Orleans, had casually told him at the house last 
night that Selby and his family went to New York 
yesterday morning and were to sail for Europe 
to-day. 

Philip had another idea which he did not mention. 
He seized his hat, and saying that he would go and 

149 


MARK TWAIN 


see what he could learn, ran to the lodgings of 
Harry, whom he had not seen since yesterday after- 
noon, when he left him to go to the House. 
Harry was notin. He had gone out with a hand- 
bag before six o’clock yesterday, saying that he had 
to go to New York, but should return next day. In 
Harry’s room on the table Philip found this note: 


Dear Mr. Brierly,—Can you meet me at the six-o’clock train, 
and be my escort to New York? I have to go about this Uni- 
versity bill, the vote of an absent member we must have here. 
Senator Dilworthy cannot go. Yours &c., lL; He 


“‘Confound it,’ said Philip, “‘the noodle has 
fallen into her trap. And she promised me she 
would let him alone.”’ 

He only stopped to send a note to Senator Dil- 
worthy, telling him what he had found, and that he 
should go at once to New York, and then hastened 
to the railway-station. He had to wait an hour for 
a train, and when it did start it seemed to go ata 
snail’s pace. 

Philip was devoured with anxiety. Where could 
they have gone? What was Laura’s object in taking 
Harry’? Had the flight anything to do with Selby? 
Would Harry be such a fool as to be dragged into 
some public scandal? 

It seemed as if the train would never reach Balti- 
more. Then there was a long delay at Havre de 
Grace. <A hot box had to be cooled at Wilmington. 
Would it never get on? Only in passing around the 
city of Philadelphia did the train not seem to go 
slow. Philip stood upon the platform and watched 
for the Boltons’ house, fancied he could distinguish 

150 


THE GILDED AGE 


its roof among the trees, and wondered how Ruth 
would feel if she knew he was so near her. 

Then came Jersey, everlasting Jersey, stupid, 
irritating Jersey, where the passengers are always 
asking which line they are on, and where they are 
to come out, and whether they have yet reached 
Elizabeth. Launched into Jersey, one has a vague 
notion that he is on many lines and no one in par- 
ticular, and that he is liable at any moment to come 
to Elizabeth. He has no notion what Elizabeth is, 
and always resolves that the next time he goes that 
way he will look out of the window and see what it 
is like; but he never does. Or, if he does, he prob- 
ably finds that it is Princeton or something of that 
sort. He gets annoyed, and never can see the use 
of having different names for stations in Jersey. 
By and by there is Newark, three or four Newarks, 
apparently; then marshes, then long rock-cuttings 
devoted to the advertisements of patent medicines 
and ready-made clothing and New York tonics for 
Jersey agues, and—Jersey City is reached. 

On the ferry-boat Philip bought an evening paper 
from a boy crying, ‘‘’Ere’s the Evening Gram, all 
about the murder,” and with breathless haste ran 
his eyes over the following: 


SHOCKING MURDER!!! 


TRAGEDY IN HIGH LIFE! ! A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN SHOOTS A DIS- 
TINGUISHED CONFEDERATE SOLDIER AT THE SOUTHERN 
HOTEL!!! JEALOUSY THE CAUSE! !!! 


This morning occurred another of those shocking murders 
which have become the almost daily food of the newspapers, the 
direct result of the socialistic doctrines and woman’s rights 

TB 


MARK TWAIN 


agitations, which have made every woman the avenger of her 
own wrongs, and all society the hunting-ground for her victims. 

About nine o’clock a lady deliberately shot a man dead in 
the public parlor of the Southern Hotel, coolly remarking, as 
she threw down her revolver and permitted herself to be taken 
into custody, “He brought it on himself.’ Our reporters were 
immediately despatched to the scene of the tragedy, and gathered 
the following particulars. 

Yesterday afternoon arrived at the hotel from Washington, 
Col. George Selby and family, who had taken passage and were 
to sail at noon to-day in the steamer Scotia for England. The 
Colonel was a handsome man about forty, a gentleman of wealth 
and high social position, a resident of New Orleans. He served 
with distinction in the Confederate army, and received a wound 
in the leg from which he has never entirely recovered, being 
obliged to use a cane in locomotion. 

This morning at about nine o’clock a lady, accompanied by a 
gentleman, called at the office of the hotel and asked for Colonel 
Selby. The Colonel was at breakfast. Would the clerk tell 
him that a lady and gentleman wished to see him for a moment 
in the parlor? The clerk says that the gentleman asked her, 
“What do you want to see him for?” and that she replied, “‘He 
is going to Europe, and I ought to just say good-by.” 

Colonel Selby was informed, and the lady and gentleman were 
shown to the parlor, in which were at the time three or four 
other persons. Five minutes after two shots were fired in quick 
succession, and there was a rush to the parlor from which the 
reports came. 

Colonel Selby was found lying on the floor, bleeding, but not 
dead. Two gentlemen, who had just come in, had seized the 
lady, who made no resistance, and she was at once given in 
charge of a police officer who arrived. The persons who were 
in the parlor agree substantially as to what occurred. They 
had happened to be looking toward the door when the man— 
Colonel Selby—entered with his cane, and they looked at him, 
because he stopped as if surprised and frightened, and made a 
backward movement. At the same moment the lady in the 
bonnet advanced toward him and said something like “George, 
will you come with me?” He replied, throwing up his hand 
and retreating, ““My God! I can’t, don’t fire,” and the next 
instant two shots were heard and he fell. The lady appeared 

152 


THE GILDED AGE 


to be beside herself with rage or excitement, and trembled very 
much when the gentlemen took hold of her; it was to them she 
said, ‘‘He brought it on himself.” 

Colonel Selby was carried at once to his room and Dr. Puffer, 
the eminent surgeon, was sent for. It was found that he was 
shot through the breast and through the abdomen. Other aid 
was summoned, but the wounds were mortal, and Colonel Selby 
expired in an hour, in pain, but his mind was clear to the last, 
and he made a full deposition. The substance of it was that his 
murderess is a Miss Laura Hawkins, whom he had known at 
Washington as a lobbyist, and had had some business with her. 
She had followed him with her attentions and solicitations, and 
had endeavored to make him desert his wife and go to Europe 
with her. When he resisted and avoided her, she had threat- 
ened him. Only the day before he left Washington she had 
declared that he should never go out of the city alive with- 
out her. 

It seems to have been a deliberate and premeditated murder, 
the woman following him from Washington on purpose to 
commit it. 

We learn that the murderess, who is a woman of dazzling and 
transcendent beauty and about twenty six or seven, is a niece 
of Senator Dilworthy, at whose house she has been spending the 
winter. She belongs to a high Southern family, and has the 
reputation of being an heiress. Like some other great beauties 
and belles in Washington, however, there have been whispers 
that she had something to do with the lobby. If we mistake 
not we have heard her name mentioned in connection with the 
sale of the Tennessee Lands to the Knobs University, the bill 
for which passed the House last night. 

Her companion is Mr. Harry Brierly, a New York dandy, 
who has been in Washington. His connection with her and 
with this tragedy is not known, but he was also taken into 
custody, and will be detained at least as a witness. 

P. S. One of the persons present in the parlor says that 
after Laura Hawkins had fired twice, she turned the pistol 
toward herself, but that Brierly sprang and caught it 
from her hand, and that it was he who threw it on the 
floor. 

Further particulars with full biographies of all the parties in 
our next edition. 


153 


MARK TWAIN 


Philip hastened at once to the Southern Hotel, 
where he found still a great state of excitement, and 
a thousand different and exaggerated stories passing 
from mouth to mouth. The witnesses of the event 
had told it over so many times that they had worked 
it up into a most dramatic scene, and embellished it 
with whatever could heighten its awfulness. Out- 
siders had taken up invention also. The Colonel’s 
wife had gone insane, they said. The children had 
rushed into the parlor and rolled themselves in their 
father’s blood. The hotel cierk said that he noticed 
there was murder in the woman’s eye when he saw 
her. A person who had met the woman on the 
stairs felt a creeping sensation. Some thought 
Brierly was an accomplice, and that he had set the 
woman on to kill his rival. Some said the woman 
showed the calmness and indifference of insanity. 

Philip learned that Harry and Laura had both 
been taken to the city prison, and he went there; 
but he was not admitted. Not being a newspaper 
reporter, he could not see either of them that night; 
but the officer questioned him suspiciously and 
asked him who he was. He might perhaps see 
Brierly in the morning. 

The latest editions of the evening papers had the 
result of the inquest. It was a plain enough case 
for the jury, but they sat over it a long time, listen- 
ing to the wrangling of the physicians. Dr. Puffer 
insisted that the man died from the effects of the 
wound in the chest. Dr. Dobb as strongly insisted 
that the wound in the abdomen caused death. Dr. 
Golightly suggested that, in his opinion, death 

154 


THE GILDED AGE 


ensued from a complication of the two wounds and 
perhaps other causes. He examined the table 
waiter, as to whether Colonel Selby ate any break- 
fast, and what he ate, and if he had any appetite. 

The jury finally threw themselves back upon the 
indisputable fact that Selby was dead, that either 
wound would have killed him (admitted by the doc- 
tors), and rendered a verdict that he died from 
pistol-shot wounds inflicted by a pistol in the hands 
of Laura Hawkins. 

The morning papers blazed with big type, and 
overflowed with details of the murder. The ac- 
counts in the evening papers were only the pre- 
monitory drops to this mighty shower. The scene 
was dramatically worked up in column after column. 
There were sketches, biographical and _ historical. 
There were long ‘‘specials’” from Washington, 
giving a full history of Laura’s career there, with 
the names of men with whom she was said to be 
intimate, a description of Senator Dilworthy’s resi- 
dence and of his family, and of Laura’s room in his 
house, and a sketch of the Senator’s appearance 
and what he said. There was a great deal about 
her beauty, her accomplishments, and her brilliant 
position in society, and her doubtful position in 
society. ‘There was also an interview with Colonel 
Sellers and another with Washington Hawkins, the 
brother of the murderess. One journal had a long 
despatch from Hawkeye, reporting the excitement in 
that quiet village and the reception of the awful 
intelligence. 

All the parties had been ‘‘interviewed.’’ There 

155 


MARK TWAIN 


were reports of conversations with the clerk at the 
hotel, with the call-boy, with the waiter at table, 
with all the witnesses, with the policeman, with the 
landlord (who wanted it understood that nothing of 
that sort had ever happened in his house before, 
although it had always been frequented by the 
best Southern society), and with Mrs. Colonel Selby. 
There were diagrams illustrating the scene of the 
shooting, and views of the hotel and street, and 
portraits of the parties. 

There were three minute and different statements 
from the doctors about the wounds, so technically 
worded that nobody could understand them. Harry 
and Laura had also been ‘“‘interviewed,’’ and there 
was a statement from Philip himself, which a 
reporter had knocked him up out of bed at mid- 
night to give, though how he found him, Philip never 
could conjecture. 

What some of the journals lacked in suitable length 
for the occasion, they made up in encyclopedic in- 
formation about other similar murders and shootings. 

The statement from Laura was not full, in fact it 
was fragmentary, and consisted of nine parts of the 
reporter’s valuable observations to one of Laura’s, 
and it was, as the reporter significantly remarked, 
““incoherent.’’ But it appeared that Laura claimed 
to be Selby’s wife, or to have been his wife, that 
he had deserted her and betrayed her, and that she 
was going to follow him to Europe. When the 
reporter asked: 

““What made you shoot him, Miss Hawkins?’ 
Laura’s only reply was, very simply: 

156 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Did I shoot him? Do they say I shot him?” 
And she would say no more. 

The news of the murder was made the excitement 
of the day. Talk of it filled the town. The facts 
reported were scrutinized, the standing of the parties 
was discussed, the dozen different theories of the 
motive, broached in the newspapers, were disputed 
over. 

During the night subtle electricity had carried 
the tale over all the wires of the continent and 
under the sea; and in all villages and towns of the 
Union, from the Atlantic to the territories, and 
away up and down the Pacific slope, and as far as 
London and Paris and Berlin, that morning the name 
of Laura Hawkins was spoken by millions and mil- 
lions of people, while the owner of it—the sweet 
child of years ago, the beautiful queen of Washing- 
ton drawing-rooms—sat shivering on her cot-bed in 
the darkness of a damp cell in the Tombs. 


CHAPTER XVI 
LAURA IN THE TOMBS 


—Mana go c’u x-opon-vi ri v’oyeualal, ri v’achihilal! ahcarroc 
cah, ahcarroc uleu! la quitzih varal in camel, in zachel varal 
chuxmut cah, chuxmut uleu! 


Rabinal-A chi. 
HILIP’S first effort was to get Harry out of the 
Tombs. He gained permission to see him, in 
the presence of an officer, during the day, and he 
found that hero very much cast down. 

‘‘IJ never intended to come to such a place as this, 
old fellow,’’ he said to Philip; ‘‘it’s no place for a 
gentleman, they’ve no idea how to treat a gentle- 
man. Look at that provender,’’ pointing to his un- 
eaten prison ration. ‘‘They tell me I am detained 
as a witness, and I passed the night among a lot 
of cutthroats and dirty rascals—a pretty witness 
I’d be in a month spent in such company.” 

‘But what under heavens,’’ asked Philip, ‘‘in- 
duced you to come to New York with Laura! 
What was it for?” 

‘““What for? Why, she wanted me to come. 
I didn’t know anything about that cursed Selby. 
She said it was lobby business for the University. I'd 
no idea what she was dragging me into that con- 
founded hotel for. I suppose she knew that the 

158 


THe GILDED AGE 


Southerners all go there, and thought she’d find 
her man. Oh! Lord, I wish I’d taken your advice. 
You might as well murder somebody and have the 
credit of it, as get into the newspapers the way I 
have. She’s pure devil, that girl. You ought to have 
seen how sweet she wason me. What an ass I am!” 

‘‘Well, I’m not going to dispute a poor prisoner. 
But the first thing is to get you out of this. I’ve 
brought the note Laura wrote you, for one thing, 
and I’ve seen your uncle, and explained the truth 
of the case to him. He will be here soon.” 

Harry’s uncle came, with other friends, and in the 
course of the day made such a showing to the 
authorities that Harry was released, on giving bonds 
to appear as a witness when wanted. His spirits 
rose with their usual elasticity as soon as he was out 
of Centre Street, and he insisted on giving Philip 
and his friends a royal supper at Delmonico’s, an 
excess which was perhaps excusable in the rebound of 
his feelings, and which was committed with his usual 
reckless generosity. Harry ordered the supper, and 
it is perhaps needless to say that Philip paid the bill. 

Neither of the young men felt like attempting to 
see Laura that day, and she saw no company except 
the newspaper reporters, until the arrival of Colonel 
Sellers and Washington Hawkins, who had hastened 
to New York with all speed. 

They found Laura in a cell in the upper tier of the 
women’s department. The cell was somewhat larger 
than those in the men’s department, and might be 
eight feet by ten square, perhaps a little longer. It 
was of stone, floor and all, and the roof was oven- 

159 


MARK TWAIN 


shaped. A narrow slit in the roof admitted suffi- 
cient light, and was the only means of ventilation; 
when the window was opened there was nothing to 
prevent the rain coming in. The only means of 
heating being from the corridor, when the door was 
ajar, the cell was chilly and at this time damp. It 
was whitewashed and clean, but it had a slight jail 
odor; its only furniture was a narrow iron bedstead, 
with a tick of straw and some blankets, not too 
clean. 

When Colonel Sellers was conducted to the cell 
by the matron and looked in, his emotions quite 
overcame him, the tears rolled down his cheeks and 
his voice trembled so that he could hardly speak. 
Washington was unable to say anything; he looked 
from Laura to the miserable creatures who were 
walking in the corridor with unutterable disgust. 
Laura was alone calm and self-contained, though she 
was not unmoved by the sight of the grief of her 
friends. » 

_ “Are you comfortable, Laura?’ was the first 
word the Colonel could get out. 

‘“You see,’ she replied. ‘‘I can’t say it’s exactly 
comfortable.” 

“Are you cold?” 

“It is pretty chilly. The stone floor is like ice. 
It chills me through to step on it. I have to sit 
on the bed.” 

‘Poor thing! poor thing! And can you eat any- 
thing ?”’ 

‘“‘No, I am not hungry. I don’t know that I 
could eat anything. I can’t eat that.” 

| 160 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘Oh dear,’’ continued the Colonel, ‘‘it’s dreadful. 
But cheer up, dear, cheer up’; and the Colonel 
broke down entirely. 

‘‘But,” he went on, ‘‘we’ll stand by you. We'll 
do everything for you. I know you couldn’t have 
meant to do it. It must have been insanity, you 
know, or something of that sort. You never did 
anything of the sort before.” 

Laura smiled very faintly and said: 

““Yes, it was something of that sort. It’s all a 
whirl. He was a villain; you don’t know.” 

‘I'd rather have killed him myself, in a duel you 
know, all fair. I wish I had. But don’t you be 
down. We'll get you off—the best counsel, the 
lawyers in New York can do anything; I’ve read 
of cases. But you must be comfortable now. We've 
brought some of your clothes, at the hotel. What 
else can we get for you?” 

Laura suggested that she would like some sheets 
for her bed, a piece of carpet to step on, and her 
meals sent in; and some books and writing-ma- 
terials if it was allowed. The Colonel and Wash- 
ington promised to procure all these things, and then 
took their sorrowful leave, a great deal more affected 
than the criminal was, apparently, by her situation. 

The Colonel told the matron as he went away that 
if she would look to Laura’s comfort a little it 
shouldn’t be the worse for her; and to the turnkey 
who let them out he patronizingly said: 

‘‘You’ve got a big establishment here, a credit to 
the city. I’ve got a friend in there—I shall see 
you again, sir.”’ 

161 


MARK TWAIN 


By the next day something more of Laura’s own 
story began to appear in the newspapers, colored 
and heightened by reporters’ rhetoric. Some of 
them cast a lurid light upon the Colonel’s career, 
and represented his victim as a beautiful avenger of 
her murdered innocence; and others pictured her as 
his willing paramour and pitiless slayer. Her com- 
munications to the reporters were stopped by her 
lawyers as soon as they were retained and visited 
her, but this fact did not prevent—it may have 
facilitated—the appearance of casual paragraphs 
here and there which were likely to beget popular 
sympathy for the poor girl. 

The occasion did not pass without ‘‘improvement”’ 
by the leading journals; and Philip preserved the 
editorial comments of three or four of them which 
pleased him most. These he used to read aloud to 
his friends afterward and ask them to guess from 
which journal each of them had been cut. One 
began in this simple manner: 


History never repeats itself, but the kaleidoscopic combina- 
tions of the pictured present often seem to be constructed out 
of the broken fragments of antique legends. Washington is not 
Corinth, and Lais, the beautiful daughter of Timandra, might 
not have been the prototype of the ravishing Laura, daughter 
of the plebeian house of Hawkins; but the orators and statesmen 
who were the purchasers of the favors of the one, may have 
been as incorruptible as the Republican statesmen who learned 
how to love and how to vote from the sweet lips of the Wash- 
ington lobbyist; and perhaps the modern Lais would never have 
departed from the national capital if there had been there even 
one republican Xenocrates who resisted her blandishments. 
But here the parallel fails. Lais, wandering away with the 
youth Hippostratus, is slain by the women who are jealous of 
her charms. Laura, straying into her Thessaly with the youth 

162 


THE GILDED AGE 


Brierly, slays her other lover and becomes the champion of the 
wrongs of her sex. 


Another journal began its editorial with less lyrical 
beauty, but with equal force. It closed as follows: 


With Laura Hawkins, fair, fascinating, and fatal, and with 
the dissolute Colonel of a lost cause, who has reaped the harvest 
he sowed, we have nothing to do. But as the curtain rises on 
this awful tragedy, we catch a glimpse of the society at the 
capital under this Administration, which we cannot contemplate 
without alarm for the fate of the Republic. 


A third newspaper took up the subject in a differ- 
ent tone. It said: 


Our repeated predictions are verified. The pernicious doc- 
trines which we have announced as prevailing in American 
society have been again illustrated. The name of the city is 
becoming a reproach. We may have done something in averting 
its ruin in our resolute exposure of the Great Frauds; we shall 
not be deterred from insisting that the outraged laws for the 
protection of human life shall be vindicated now, so that a person 
can walk the streets or enter the public houses, at least in the 
daytime, without the risk of a bullet through his brain. 


A fourth journal began its remarks as follows: 


The fullness with which we present our readers this morning 
the details of the Selby-Hawkins homicide is a miracle of modern 
journalism. Subsequent investigation can do little to fill out 
the picture. It is the old story. A beautiful woman shoots her 
absconding lover in cold blood; and we shall doubtless learn in 
due time that if she was not as mad as a hare in this month of 
March, she was at least laboring under what is termed ‘‘mo- 
mentary insanity.” 


It would not be too much to say that upon the 
first publication of the facts of the tragedy, there was 
an almost universal feeling of rage against the mur- 
deress in the Tombs, and that reports of her beauty 

163 


MARK TWAIN 


only heightened the indignation. It was as if she 
presumed upon that and upon her sex, to defy the 
law; and there was a fervent hope that the law would 
take its plain course. 

Yet Laura was not without friends, and some of 
them very influential, too. She had in her keeping 
a great many secrets and a great many reputations, 
perhaps. Who shall set himself up to judge human 
motives? Why, indeed, might we not feel pity for 
a woman whose brilliant career had been so suddenly 
extinguished in misfortune and crime? Those who 
had known her so well in Washington might find it 
impossible to believe that the fascinating woman 
could have had murder in her heart, and would 
readily give ear to the current sentimentality about 
the temporary aberration of mind under the stress of 
personal calamity. 

Senator Dilworthy was greatly shocked, of course, 
but he was full of charity for the erring. 

‘“We shall all need mercy,” he said. ‘“‘Laura as 
an inmate of my family was a most exemplary 
female, amiable, affectionate, and truthful, perhaps 
too fond of gaiety, and neglectful of the externals 
of religion, but a woman of principle. She may 
have had experiences of which I am ignorant, but 
she could not have gone to this extremity if she had 
been in her own right mind.” 

To the Senator’s credit be it said, he was willing 
to help Laura and her family in this dreadful trial. 
She, herself, was not without money, for the Wash- 
ington lobbyist is not seldom more fortunate than 
the Washington claimant, and she was able to pro- 

164 


THE GILDED AGE 


cure a good many luxuries to mitigate the severity 
of her prison life. It enabled her also to have her 
own family near her, and to see some of them daily. 
The tender solicitude of her mother, her childlike 
grief, and her firm belief in the real guiltlessness of 
her daughter, touched even the custodians of the 
Tombs, who are inured to scenes of pathos. 

Mrs. Hawkins had hastened to her daughter as 
soon as she received money for the journey. She 
had no reproaches, she had only tenderness and 
pity. She could not shut out the dreadful facts of 
the case, but it had been enough for her that Laura 
had said, in their first interview, ‘‘ Mother, I did not 
know what I was doing.”” She obtained lodgings 
near the prison and devoted her life to her daughter, 
as if she had been really her own child. She would 
have remained in the prison day and night if it had 
been permitted. She was aged and feeble, but this 
great necessity seemed to give her new life. 

The pathetic story of the old lady’s ministrations 
and her simplicity and faith, also got into the news- 
papers in time, and probably added to the pathos of 
this wrecked woman’s fate, which was beginning to 
be felt by the public. It was certain that she had 
champions who thought that her wrongs ought to 
be placed against her crime, and expressions of this 
feeling came to her in various ways. Visitors came 
to see her, and gifts of fruit and flowers were sent, 
which brought some cheer into her hard and gloomy 
cell. 

Laura had declined to see either Philip or Harry, 
somewhat to the former’s relief, who had a notion 

165 


MARK TWAIN 


that she would necessarily feel humiliated by seeing 
him after breaking faith with him, but to the dis- 
comfiture of Harry, who still felt her fascination, 
and thought her refusal heartless. He told Philip 
that of course he had got through with such a 
woman, but he wanted to see her. 

Philip, to keep him from some new foolishness, 
persuaded him to go with him to Philadelphia, and 
give his valuable services in the mining operations 
at Ilium. 

The law took its course with Laura. She was in- 
dicted for murder in the first degree, and held for 
trial at the summer term. The two most distin- 
guished criminal lawyers in the city’ had been re- 
tained for her defense, and to that. the resolute 
woman devoted her days, with a courage that rose 
as she consulted with her counsel and understood 
the methods of criminal procedure in New York. 

She was greatly depressed, however, by the news 
from Washington. Congress had adjourned and her 
bill had failed to pass the Senate. It must wait for 
the next session. 


CHAPTER XVII 


MR. BIGLER HELPED OUT WHILE MR. BOLTON RUNS 
IN DEBT 


—In our werking, nothing us availle; 

For lost is all our labour and travaille, 

And all the cost a twenty devil way 

Is lost also, which we upon it lay. 
Chaucer, 


He moonihoawa ka aie. 
Hawattan Proverb. 


T had been a bad winter, somehow, for the firm 

of Pennybacker, Bigler, and Small. These cele- 
brated contractors usually made more money during 
the session of the legislature at Harrisburg than 
upon all their summer work, and this winter had 
been unfruitful. It was unaccountable to Bigler. 

“You see, Mr. Bolton,” he said, and Philip was 
present at the conversation, ‘‘it puts us all out. It 
looks as if politics was played out. We’d counted 
on the year of Simon’s re-election. And now he’s 
re-elected, and I’ve yet to see the first man who’s 
te better for it.’’ 

“You don’t mean to say,’’ asked Philip, ‘‘that he 
went in without paying anything?” 

““Not a cent, not a dash cent, as I can hear,”’ 
repeated Mr. Bigler, indignantly. ‘‘I call it a 

167 


MARK TWAIN 


swindle on the state. How it was done gets me. I 
never saw such a tight time for money in Harrisburg.” 

‘‘Were there no combinations, no railroad jobs, 
no mining schemes put through in connection with 
the election?” — 

‘‘Not that I know,” said Bigler, shaking his head 
in disgust. ‘‘In fact, it was openly said that there 
was no money in the election. It’s perfectly un- 
heard of.” 

‘*Perhaps,’’ suggested Philip, ‘‘it was effected on 
what the insurance companies call the ‘endowment,’ 
or the ‘paid-up,’ plan, by which a policy is secured 
after a certain time without further payment.” 

“You think, then,’”’ said Mr. Bolton, smiling, 
‘‘that a liberal and sagacious politician might own 
a legislature after a time, and not be bothered with 
keeping up his payments?” 

‘‘Whatever it is,” interrupted Mr. Bigler, ‘‘it’s 
devilish ingenious, and goes ahead of my calcula- 
tions; it’s cleaned me out, when I thought we had a 
dead-sure thing. I tell you what it is, gentlemen, 
I shall go in for reform. Things have got pretty 
mixed when a legislature will give away a United 
States Senatorship.’’ 

It was melancholy, but Mr. Bigler was not a man 
to be crushed by one misfortune, or to lose his 
confidence in human nature on one exhibition of 
apparent honesty. He was already on his feet 
again, or would be if Mr. Bolton could tide him over 
the shoal water for ninety days. 

‘‘We've got something with money in it,”’ he ex- 
plained to Mr. Bolton, ‘‘got hold of it by good luck. 

168 


’ 


THE GILDED AGE 


We've got the entire contract for Dobson’s Patent 
Pavement for the city of Mobile. See here.’’ 

Mr. Bigler made some figures: contract so much, 
cost of work and materials so much, profits so 
much. At the end of three months the city would 
owe the company three hundred and seventy-five 
thousand dollars—two hundred thousand of that 
would be profits. The whole job was worth at 
least a million to the company—it might be more. 
There could be no mistake in these figures; here 
was the contract. Mr. Bolton knew what ma- 
terials were worth and what the labor would 
cost. 

Mr. Bolton knew perfectly well from sore experi- 
ence that there was always a mistake in figures when 
Bigler or Small made them, and he knew that he 
ought to send the fellow about his business. Instead 
of that, he let him talk. 

They only wanted to raise fifty thousand dollars 
to carry on the contract—that expended, they would 
have city bonds. Mr. Bolton said he hadn’t the 
money. But Bigler could raise it on his name. 
Mr. Bolton said he had no right to put his family to 
that risk. But the entire contract could be assigned 
to him—the security was ample—it was a fortune to 
him if it was forfeited. Besides, Mr. Bigler had been 
unfortunate, he didn’t know where to look for the 
necessaries of life for his family. If he could only 
have one more chance, he was sure he could right 
himself. He begged for it. 

And Mr. Bolton yielded. He could never refuse 
such appeals. If he had befriended a man once and 

169 


MARK TWAIN 


been cheated by him, that man appeared to have a 
claim upon him forever. He shrank, however, from 
telling his wife what he had done on this occasion, 
for he knew that if any person was more odious 
than Small to his family it was Bigler. 

**Philip tells me,’’ Mrs. Bolton said that evening, 
“that the man Bigler has been with thee again to-day. 
I hope thee will have nothing more to do with him.”’ 

“‘He has been very unfortunate,’”’ replied Mr. 
Bolton, uneasily. 

‘‘He is always unfortunate, and he is always 
getting thee into trouble. But thee didn’t listen to 
him again?” 

“Well, mother, his family is in want, and I lent 
him my name—but I took ample security. The 
worst that can happen will be a little inconvenience.” 

Mrs. Bolton looked grave and anxious, but she 
did not complain or remonstrate; she knew what 
a “‘little inconvenience’? meant, but she knew there 
was no help for it. If Mr. Bolton had been on his 
way to market to buy a dinner for his family with 
the only dollar he had in the world in his pocket, 
he would have given it to a chance beggar who asked 
him for it. Mrs. Bolton only asked (and the ques- 
tion showed that she was no more provident than 
her husband where her heart was interested): 

“But has thee provided money for Philip to use 
in opening the coal-mine?”’ 

“Yes, I have set apart as much as it ought to cost 
to open the mine, as much as we can afford to lose 
if no coal is found. Philip has the control of it as 
equal partner in the venture, deducting the capital 

170 


THE GILDED AGE 


invested. He has great confidence in his success, 
and I hope for his sake he won’t be disappointed.”’ 

Philip could not but feel that he was treated very 
much like one of the Bolton family—by all except 
Ruth. His mother, when he went home after his 
recovery from his accident, had affected to be very 
jealous of Mrs. Bolton, about whom and Ruth she 
asked a thousand questions—an affectation of jeal- 
ousy which, no doubt, concealed a real heartache, 
which comes to every mother when her son goes 
out into the world and forms new ties. And to Mrs. 
Sterling, a widow, living on a small income in a 
remote Massachusetts village, Philadelphia was a 
city of many splendors. All its inhabitants seemed 
highly favored, dwelling in ease and surrounded by 
superior advantages. Some of her neighbors had 
relations living in Philadelphia, and it seemed to 
them somehow a guarantee of respectability to have 
relations in Philadelphia. Mrs. Sterling was not 
sorry to have Philip make his way among such well- 
to-do people, and she was sure that no good fortune 
could be too good for his deserts. 

“So, sir,’’ said Ruth, when Philip came from 
New York, ‘‘you have been assisting in a pretty 
tragedy. I saw your name in the papers. Is this 
woman a specimen of your Western friends?” 

‘“My only assistance,’ replied Philip, a little 
annoyed, ‘‘was in trying to keep Harry out of a 
bad scrape, and I failed after all. He walked into 
her trap, and he has been punished for it. I’m 
going to take him up to Ilium to see if he won’t 
work steadily at one thing, and quit his nonsense.” 

ryt 


MARK TWAIN 


‘“‘Is she as beautiful as the newspapers say she 
is?’ 

“I don’t know, she has a kind of beauty—she 
is not like—”’ 

‘“‘Not like Alice?”’ 

‘“Well, she is brilliant; she was called the hand- 
somest woman in Washington—dashing, you know, 
and sarcastic and witty. Ruth, do you believe a 
woman ever becomes a devil?” 

“Men do, and I don’t know why women shouldn’t. 
But I never saw one.”’ 

“Well, Laura Hawkins comes very near it. But 
it is dreadful to think of her fate.”’ 

‘“Why, do you suppose they will hang a woman? 
Do you suppose they will be so barbarous as that?’’ 

“I wasn’t thinking of that—it’s doubtful if a 
New York jury would find a woman guilty of any 
such crime. But to think of her life if she is ac- 
quitted.” 

“It is dreadful,’’ said Ruth, thoughtfully, ‘‘but 
the worst of it is that you men do not want women 
educated to do anything, to be able to earn an 
honest living by their own exertions. They are 
educated as if they were always to be petted and 
supported, and there was never to be any such thing 
as misfortune. I suppose, now, that you would all 
choose to have me stay idly at home, and give up 
my profession.” 

“Oh, no,” said Philip, earnestly, ‘‘I respect your 
resolution. But, Ruth, do you think you would be 
happier or do more good in following your pro- 
fession than in having a home of your own?” 

172 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘What is to hinder having a home of my own?” 

‘‘Nothing, perhaps, only you never would be in 
it—you would be away day and night, if you had 
any practice; and what sort of a home would that 
make for your husband?’ 

‘“What sort of a home is it for the wife whose 
husband is always away riding about in his doctor’s 
Ber 

‘‘Ah, you know that is not fair. The woman 
makes the home.”’ 

Philip and Ruth often had this sort of discussion, 
to which Philip was always trying to give a personal 
turn. He was now about to go to Ilium for the 
season, and he did not like to go without some 
assurance from Ruth that she might perhaps love 
him some day, when he was worthy of it, and when 
he could offer her something better than a partner- 
ship in his poverty. 

“I should work with a great deal better heart, 
Ruth,”’ he said the morning he was taking leave, 
“if I knew you cared for me a hittle.”’ 

Ruth was looking down; the color came faintly 
to her cheeks, and she hesitated. She needn’t be 
looking down, he thought, for she was ever so much 
shorter than tall Philip. 

“It’s not much of a place, Ilium,’’ Philip went 
on, as if a little geographical remark would fit in 
here as well as anything else, ‘‘and I shall have 
plenty of time to think over the responsibility I 
have taken, and—’”’ his observation did not seem to 
be coming out anywhere. 

But Ruth looked up, and there was a light in her 

173 


MARK TWAIN 


eyes that quickened Phil’s pulse. She took his 
hand, and said with serious sweetness: 

‘‘Thee mustn’t lose heart, Philip.”” And then she 
added, in another mood: ‘‘Thee knows I graduate 
in the summer and shall have my diploma. And if 
anything happens—mines explode sometimes—thee 
can send for me. Farewell.”’ 

The opening of the Ilium coal-mine was begun 
with energy, but without many omens of success. 
Philip was running a tunnel into the breast of the 
mountain, in faith that the coal stratum ran there as 
it ought to. How far he must go in he believed he 
knew, but no one could tell exactly. Some of the 
miners said that they should probably go through 
the mountain, and that the hole could be used for a 
railway-tunnel. The mining-camp was a busy place 
at any rate. Quite a settlement of board and log 
shanties had gone up, with a blacksmith shop, a 
small machine shop, and a temporary store for sup- 
plying the wants of the workmen. Philip and 
Harry pitched a commodious tent, and lived in the 
full enjoyment of the free life. 

There is no difficulty in digging a hole in the 
ground, if you have money enough to pay for the 
digging, but those who try this sort of work are 
always surprised at the large amount of money 
necessary to make a small hole. The earth is never 
willing to yield one product, hidden in her bosom, 
without an equivalent for it; and when a person 
asks of her coal, she is quite apt to require gold in 
exchange. | 

It was exciting work for all concerned in it. As 

174 


THE GILDED AGE 


the tunnel advanced into the rock every day prom- 
ised to be the golden day. This very blast might 
disclose the treasure. 

The work went on week after week, and at length 
during the night as well as the daytime. Gangs 
relieved each other, and the tunnel was every hour, 
inch by inch and foot by foot, crawling into the 
mountain. Philip was on the stretch of hope and 
excitement. Every pay-day he saw his funds melt- 
ing away, and still there was only the faintest show 
of what the miners call “signs.” 

The life suited Harry, whose buoyant hopeful- 
ness was never disturbed. He made endless calcu- 
lations, which nobody could understand, of the 
probable position of the vein. He stood about 
among the workmen with the busiest air. When he 
was down at Ilium he called himself the engineer of 
the works, and he used to spend hours smoking his 
pipe with the Dutch landlord on the hotel porch, and 
astonishing the idlers there with the stories of his 
railroad operations in Missouri. He talked with the 
landlord, too, about enlarging his hotel, and about 
buying some village lots, in the prospect of a rise, 
when the mine was opened. He taught the Dutch- 
man how to mix a great many cooling drinks for the 
summer-time, and had a bill at the hotel, the grow- 
ing length of which Mr. Dusenheimer contem- 
plated with pleasant anticipations. Mr. Brierly was 
a very useful and cheering person wherever he 
went. - 

Midsummer arrived. Philip could report to Mr. 
Bolton only progress, and this was not a cheerful 

175 


MARK TWAIN 


message for him to send to Philadelphia in reply to 
inquiries that he thought became more and more 
anxious. Philip himself was a prey to the constant 
fear that the money would give out before the coal 
was struck. 

At this time Harry was summoned to New York, 
to attend the trial of Laura Hawkins. It was possi- 
ble that Philip would have to go also, her lawyer 
wrote, but they hoped for a postponement. There 
was important evidence that they could not yet ob- 
tain, and he hoped the judge would not force them 
to a trial unprepared. There were many reasons 
for a delay, reasons which of course are never men- 
tioned, but which it would seem that a New York 
judge sometimes must understand, when he grants 
a postponement upon a motion that seems to the 
public altogether inadequate. 

Harry went, but he soon came back. The trial 
was put off. Every week we can gain, said the 
learned counsel, Braham, improves our chances. 
The popular rage never lasts long. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


PHILIP JUST MISSBS STRIKING COAL 


Coinne sa6incraz0, HO He HaAOATO: G1eCHYAO ACKPWIOChs 
““Mofére ipa eiye na.”” ‘Aki ije ofere li obbé.” 


4 E’VE struck it!” 

This was the electric announcement at 
the tent door that woke Philip out of a sound sleep 
at dead of night, and shook all the sleepiness out 
of him in a trice. 

‘“What! Where is it? When? Coal? Let me 
see it. What quality is it?’’ were some of the rapid 
questions that Philip poured out as he hurriedly 
dressed. ‘‘Harry, wake up, my boy. The coal- 
train is coming. Struck it, eh? Let’s see!’’ 

The foreman put down his lantern, and handed 
Philip a black lump. There was no mistake about 
it, it was the hard, shining anthracite, and its freshly 
fractured surface glistened in the light like polished 
steel. Diamond never shone with such luster in 
the eyes of Philip. 

Harry was exuberant, but Philip’s natural caution 
found expression in his next remark. 

‘‘Now, Roberts, you are sure about this?” 

‘‘What—sure that it’s coal?’ 

‘‘Oh, no, sure that it’s the main vein?”’ 

177 


MARK TWAIN 


‘Well, yes. We took it to be that.” 

“Did you from the first?” 

““T can’t say we did at first. No, we didn’t. 
Most of the indications were there, but not all of 
them, not all of them. So we thought we’d pros- 
pect a bit: 

“Well?” 

“‘It was tolerable thick, and looked as if it might 
be the vein—looked as if it ought to be the vein. 
Then we went down on it alittle. Looked better all 
the time.”’ 

‘When did you strike it?” 

‘About ten o’clock.” 

*“Then you’ve been prospecting about four hours.” 

““Yes, been sinking on it something over four 
hours.” 

“‘T’m afraid you couldn’t go down very far in four 
hours—could you?” 

“‘Oh, yes—it’s a good deal broke up, nothing but 
picking and gadding stuff.”’ 

‘Well, it does look encouraging, sure enough— 
but then the lacking indications—” 

““T’d rather we had them, Mr. Sterling, but I’ve 
seen more than one good permanent mine struck 
without ’em in my time.” 

“Well, that is encouraging too.’ 

“Yes, there was the Union, the roars and the 
Black Mohawk—all good, sound mines, you know—all 
just exactly like this one when we first struck them.” 

‘Well, I begin to feel a good deal more easy. I 
guess we've really got it. JI remember hearing them 
tell about the Black Mohawk.” 

178 


TH GILDED AGE 


‘‘I’m free to say that I believe it, and the men 
all think so, too. They are all old hands at this 
business.” 

‘Come, Harry, let’s go up and look at it, just 
for the comfort of it,’’ said Philip. They came 
back in the course of an hour, satisfied and happy. 

There was no more sleep for them that night. 
They lit their pipes, put a specimen of the coal on 
the table, and made it a kind of lodestone of thought 
and conversation. 

‘‘Of course,” said Harry, ‘‘there will have to be 
a branch track built, and a ‘switchback’ up the 
faal,.’’ 

‘Yes, there will be no trouble about getting the 
money for that now. We could sell out to-morrow 
for a handsome sum. That sort of coal doesn’t go 
begging within a mile of a railroad. I wonder if 
Mr. Bolton would rather sell out or work it?” 

‘‘Oh, work it,” says Harry, ‘‘probably the whole 
mountain is coal, now you’ve got to it.”’ 

‘Possibly it might not be much of a vein, after 
all,’’ suggested Philip. 

“Peecibly it 7s; Ill bet it’s forty feet thicles 1 
told you. I knew the sort of thing as soon as I put 
my eyes on it.”’ 

Philip’s next thought was to write to his friends 
and announce their good fortune. To Mr. Bolton 
he wrote a short, business letter, as calm as he could 
make it. They had found coal of excellent quality, 
but they could not yet tell with absolute certainty 
what the vein was. The prospecting was still going 
on. Philip also wrote to Ruth; but though this 

179 


MARK TWAIN 


letter may have glowed, it was not with the heat of 
burning anthracite. He needed no artificial heat to 
warm his pen and kindle his ardor when he sat down 
to write to Ruth. But it must be confessed that the 
words never flowed so easily before, and he ran on 
for an hour disporting in all the extravagance of his 
imagination. When Ruth read it, she doubted if 
the fellow had not gone out of his senses. And it 
was not until she reached the postscript that she dis- 
covered the cause of the exhilaration. ‘‘P.S. We 
have found coal.” 

The news couldn’t have come to Mr. Bolton in 
better time. He had never been so sorely pressed. 
A dozen schemes which he had in hand, any one of 
which might turn up a fortune, all languished, and 
each needed just a little more money to save that 
which had been invested. He hadn’t a piece of real 
estate that was not covered with mortgages, even to 
the wild tract which Philip was experimenting on, 
and which had no marketable value above the en- 
cumbrance on it. 

He had come home that day early, unusually 
dejected. 

‘‘T am afraid,’”’ he said to his wife, ‘‘that we shall 
have to give up our house. I don’t care for myself, 
but for thee and the children.” 

‘“That will be the least of misfortunes,” said 
Mrs. Bolton, cheerfully. ‘‘If thee can clear thyself 
from debt and anxiety, which is wearing thee out, 
we can live anywhere. Thee knows we were never 
happier than when we were in a much humbler 
home.” 

180 


408 GILDED AGE 


‘‘The truth is, Margaret, that affair of Bigler and 
Small’s has come on me just when I couldn’t stand 
another ounce. They have made another failure of 
it. I might have known they would; and the 
sharpers, or fools, IJ don’t know which, have con- 
trived to involve me for three times as much as the 
first obligation. ‘The security is in my hands, but it 
is good for nothing to me. I have not the money 
to do anything with the contract.” 

Ruth heard this dismal news without great sur- 
prise. She had long felt that they were living on a 
volcano, that might go into active operation at any 
hour. Inheriting from her father an active brain 
and the courage to undertake new things, she had 
little of his sanguine temperament, which blinds one 
to difficulties and possible failures. She had little 
confidence in the many schemes which had been 
about to lift her father out of all his embarrassments 
and into great wealth, ever since she was a child; as 
she grew older, she rather wondered that they were 
as prosperous as they seemed to be, and that they 
did not all go to smash amid so many bnilliant 
projects. She was nothing but a woman, and did 
not know how much of the business prosperity of 
the world is only a bubble of credit and specula- 
tion, one scheme helping to float another which is 
no better than it, and the whole liable to come to 
naught and confusion as soon as the busy brain 
that conceived them ceases its power to devise, or 
when some accident produces a sudden panic. 

‘‘Perhaps I shall be the stay of the family yet,”’ 
said Ruth, with an approach to gaiety. ‘‘When we 

181 


MARK TWAIN 


move into a little house in town, will thee let me 
put a little sign on the door—Dr. Rutu Botton? 
Mrs. Dr. Longstreet, thee knows, has a great in- 
come.’’ 

‘‘Who will pay for the sign, Ruth?’ asked Mr. 
Bolton. 

A servant entered with the afternoon mail from 
the office. Mr. Bolton took his letters listlessly, 
dreading to open them. He knew well what they 
contained, new difficulties, more urgent demands for 
money. 

‘‘Oh, here is one from Philip. Poor fellow! [ 
shall feel his disappointment as much as my own bad 
luck. It is hard to bear when one is young.”’ 

He opened the letter and read. As he read his 
face lightened, and he fetched such a sigh of relief, 
that Mrs. Bolton and Ruth both exclaimed. 

‘‘Read that,’’ he cried. ‘“‘Philip has found coal!’ 

The world was changed in a moment. One little 
sentence had done it. There was no more trouble. 
Philip had found coal. That meant relief. That 
meant fortune. A great weight was taken off, and 
the spirits of the whole household rose magically. 
Good Money! beautiful demon of Money, what an 
enchanter thou art! Ruth felt that she was of less 
consequence in the household, now that Philip had 
found coal, and perhaps she was not sorry to feel so. 

Mr. Bolton was ten years younger the next morn- 
ing. He went into the city, and showed his letter 
on ’change. It was the sort of news his friends 
were quite willing to listen to. They took a new 
interest in him. If it was confirmed, Bolton would 

182 


THE GILDED AGE 


come right up again. There would be no difficulty 
about his getting all the money he wanted. The 
money market did not seem to be half so tight as it 
was the day before. Mr. Bolton spent a very 
pleasant day in his office, and went home revolving 
some new plans, and the execution of some projects 
he had long been prevented from entering upon by 
the lack of money. 

The day had been spent by Philip in no less 
excitement. By daylight, with Philip’s letters to the 
mail, word had gone down to Ilium that coal had 
been found, and very early a crowd of eager specta- 
tors had come up to see for themselves. 

The ‘“‘prospecting’’ continued day and night for 
upward of a week, and during the first four or five 
days the indications grew more and more promising, 
and the telegrams and letters kept Mr. Bolton duly 
posted. But at last a change came, and the promises 
began to fail with alarming rapidity. In the end, 
it was demonstrated without the possibility of a 
doubt that the great ‘find’? was nothing but a 
worthless seam. 

Philip was cast down, all the more so because he 
had been so foolish as to send the news to Phila- 
delphia before he knew what he was writing about. 
And now he must contradict it. ‘“‘It turns out to 
be only a mere seam,” he wrote, ‘‘but we look 
upon it as an indication of better further in.” 

Alas! Mr. Bolton’s affairs could not wait for 
“indications.”” The future might have a great deal 
in store, but the present was black and hopeless. 
It was doubtful if any sacrifice could save him from 

183 


MARK TWAIN 


ruin. Yet sacrifice he must make, and that in- 
stantly, in the hope of saving something from the 
wreck of his fortune. 

His lovely country home must go. That would 
bring the most ready money. ‘The house that he 
had built with loving thought for each one of his 
family, as he planned its luxurious apartments and 
adorned it; the grounds that he had laid out, with 
so much delight in following the tastes of his wife, 
with whom the country, the cultivation of rare trees 
and flowers, the care of garden and lawn and con- 
servatories were a passion almost; this home, which 
he had hoped his children would enjoy long after 
he had done with it, must go. 

The family bore the sacrifice better than he did. 
They declared, in fact—women are such hypocrites 
—that they quite enjoyed the city (it was in August) 
after living so long in the country, that it was a 
thousand times more convenient in every respect; 
Mrs. Bolton said it was a relief from the worry 
of a large establishment, and Ruth reminded her 
father that she should have had to come to town 
anyway before long. 

Mr. Bolton was relieved, exactly as a water- 
logged ship is lightened by throwing overboard the 
most valuable portion of the cargo—but the leak 
was not stopped. Indeed, his credit was injured 
instead of helped by the prudent step he had taken. 
It was regarded as a sure evidence of his embarrass- 
ment, and it was much more difficult for him to 
obtain help than if he had, instead of retrenching, 
launched into some new speculation. 

184 


THe GILDED AGE 


Philip was greatly troubled, and exaggerated his 
own share in the bringing about of the calamity. 

“You must not look at it so!’ Mr. Bolton wrote 
him. ‘‘You have neither helped nor hindered—but 
you know you may help by and by. It would 
have all happened just so, if we had never begun 
to dig that hole. That is only a drop. Work 
away. I still have hope that something will occur 
torelieveme. At any rate, we must not give up the 
mine so long as we have any show.”’ 

Alas! the relief did not come. New misfortunes 
came instead. When the extent of the Bigler swindle 
was disclosed there was no more hope that Mr. Bolton 
could extricate himself, and he had, as an honest 
man, no resource except to surrender all his property 
for the benefit of his creditors. 

The autumn came and found Philip working with 
diminished force but still with hope. He had again 
and again been encouraged by good “‘indications,” 
but he had again and again been disappointed. He 
could not go on much longer, and almost everybody 
except himself had thought it was useless to go on 
as long as he had been doing. 

When the news came of Mr. Bolton’s failure, of 
course the work stopped. The men were discharged, 
the tools were housed, the hopeful noise of pickman 
and driver ceased, and the mining-camp had that 
desolate and mournful aspect which always hovers 
over a frustrated enterprise. 

Philip sat down amid the ruins, and almost wished 
he were buried in them. How distant Ruth was 
now from him, now, when she might need him most. 

185 


MARK TWAIN q 


How changed was all the Philadelphia world, which 
had hitherto stood for the exemplification of happi- 
ness and prosperity. 

He still had faith that there was coal in that moun- 
tain. He had made a picture of himself living there 
a hermit in a shanty by the tunnel, digging away 
with solitary pick and wheelbarrow, day after day 
and year after year, until he grew gray and aged, 
and was known in all that region as the old man of 
the mountain. Perhaps some day—he felt it must 
be so some day—he should strike coal. But what 
if he did? Who would be alive to care for it then? 
What would he care for it then? No, a man wants 
riches in his youth, when the world is fresh to him. 
He wondered why Providence could not have re- 
versed the usual process, and let the majority of men 
begin with wealth and gradually spend it, and die 
poor when they no longer needed it. 

Harry went back to the city. It was evident that 
his services were no longer needed. Indeed, he had 
letters from his uncle, which he did not read to 
Philip, desiring him to go to San Francisco to look 
after some government contracts in the harbor there. 

Philip had to look about him for something to do. 
He was like Adam: the world was all before him 
where to choose. He made, before he went else- 
where, a somewhat painful visit to Philadelphia, pain- 
ful but yet not without its sweetnesses. The family 
had never shown him so much affection before; they 
all seemed to think his disappointment of more im- 
portance than their own misfortune. And there 
was that in Ruth’s manner—in what she gave him 

186 


THE GILDED AGE 


and what she withheld—that would have made a 
hero of a very much less promising character than 
Philip Sterling. 

Among the assets of the Bolton property, the 
Ilium tract was sold, and Philip bought it in at the 
vendue, for a song, for no one cared to even under- 
take the mortgage on it except himself. He went 
away the owner of it, and had ample time before he 
reached home in November to calculate how much 
poorer he was by possessing it. 


CHAPTER XIX 


A BAD FIX. PHILIP SEES A WAY OUT OF IT 


p4 eymdir strida 4 sorgfullt sinn, 
og svipur métgangs um vanga rida, 

og bakivendir pér veréldin, 
og vellyst brosir ad pinum qvida; 

peink allt er knéttétt, og hverfast lestr, 

s& hl6 { dag er & morgun gratr; 

Alt jafnar sig! 
Sigurd Peterson. 


T is impossible for the historian, with even the 

best intentions, to control events or compel the 
persons of his narrative to act wisely or to be suc- 
cessful. It is easy to see how things might have 
been better managed; a very little change here and 
there would have made a very different history of 
this one now in hand. 

If Philip had adopted some regular profession, 
even some trade, he might now be a prosperous 
editor or a conscientious plumber, or an honest 
lawyer, and have borrowed money at the savings 
bank and built a cottage, and be now furnishing it 
for the occupancy of Ruth and himself. . Instead of 
this, with only a smattering of civil engineering, he 
is at his mother’s house, fretting and fuming over 
his ill luck, and the hardness and dishonesty of men, 
and thinking of nothing but how to get the coal out 
of the Ilium hills. 

188 


THE GILDED AGE 


If Senator Dilworthy had not made that visit to 
Hawkeye, the Hawkins family and Colonel Sellers 
would not now be dancing attendance upon Con- 
gress, and endeavoring to tempt that immaculate 
body into one of those appropriations, for the bene- 
fit of its members, which the members find it so 
difficult to explain to their constituents; and Laura 
would not be lying in the Tombs, awaiting her trial 
for murder, and doing her best, by the help of able 
counsel, to corrupt the pure fountain of criminal 
procedure in New York. 

If Henry Brierly had been blown up on the first 
Mississippi steamboat he set foot on, as the chances 
were that he would be, he and Colonel Sellers never 
would have gone into the Columbus Navigation 
scheme, and probably never into the East Tennessee 
Land scheme, and he would not now be detained in 
New York from very important business operations 
on the Pacific coast, for the sole purpose of giving 
evidence to convict of murder the only woman he 
ever loved half as much as he loves himself. 

If Mr. Bolton had said the little word ‘‘No”’ to 
Mr. Bigler, Alice Montague might now be spending 
the winter in Philadelphia, and Philip also (waiting 
to resume his mining operations in the spring); and 
Ruth would not be an assistant in a Philadelphia 
hospital, taxing her strength with arduous routine 
duties, day by day, in order to lighten a little the 
burdens that weigh upon her unfortunate family. 

It is altogether a bad business. An honest his- 
torian who had progressed thus far, and traced every- 
thing to such a condition of disaster and suspension, 

189 


MARK TWAIN \ 
might well be justified in ending his narrative and 
writing—‘‘after this the deluge.” His only con- 
solation would be in the reflection that he was not 
responsible for either characters or events. 

And the most annoying thought is that a little 
money, judiciously applied, would relieve the bur- 
dens and anxieties of most of these people; but 
affairs seem to be so arranged that money is most 
difficult to get when people need it most. 

A little of what Mr. Bolton has weakly given to 
unworthy people would now establish his family in 
a sort of comfort, and relieve Ruth of the excessive 
toil for which she inherited no adequate physical 
vigor. <A little money would make a prince of 
Colonel Sellers; and a little more would calm the 
anxiety of Washington Hawkins about Laura, for, 
however the trial ended, he could feel sure of extri- — 
cating her in the end. And if Philip had a little 
money he could unlock the stone door in the moun- 
tain whence would issue a stream of shining riches. 
It needs a golden wand to strike that rock. If the 
Knobs University bill could only go through, what 
a change would be wrought in the condition of most 
of the persons in this history. Even Philip himself 
would feel the good effects of it; for Harry would 
have something and Colonel Sellers would have 
something; and have not both these cautious people 
expressed a determination to take an interest in 
the Ilium mine when they catch their larks? 

Philip could not resist the inclination to pay a 
visit to Fallkill, He had not been at the Mon- 
tagues’ since the time he saw Ruth there, and he 

190 


THE GILDED AGE 


wanted to consult the Squire about an occupation. 
He was determined now to waste no more time in 
waiting on Providence, but to go to work at some- 
thing, if it were nothing better than teaching in the 
Fallkill Seminary, or digging clams on Hingham 
beach. Perhaps he could read law in Squire Mon- 
tague’s office while earning his bread as a teacher in 
the Seminary. 

It was not altogether Philip’s fault, let us own, 
that he was in this position. ‘There are many young 
men like him in American society, of his age, op- 
portunities, education, and abilities, who have really 
been educated for nothing and have let themselves 
drift, in the hope that they will find somehow, and 
by some sudden turn of good luck, the golden 
road to fortune. He was not idle or lazy; he had 
energy and a disposition to carve his own way. 
But he was born into a time when all young men 
of his age caught the fever of speculation, and ex- 
pected to get on in the world by the omission of 
some of the regular processes which have been 
appointed from of old. And examples were not 
wanting to encourage him. He saw people, all 
around him, poor yesterday, rich to-day, who had 
come into sudden opulence by some means which 
they could not have classified among any of the 
regular occupations of life. A war would give such 
a fellow a career and very likely fame. He might 
have been a “railroad man,’”’ or a politician, or a 
land-speculator, or one of those mysterious people 
who travel free on all railroads and steamboats, 
and are continually crossing and recrossing the 

IQI 


MARK TWAIN 


Atlantic, driven day and night about nobody knows 
what, and make a great deal of money by so doing. 
Probably, at last, he sometimes thought with a 
whimsical smile, he should end by being an insurance 
agent, and asking people to insure their lives for his 
benefit. 

Possibly Philip did not think how much the 
attractions of Fallkill were increased by the pres- 
ence of Alice there. He had known her so long, 
she had somehow grown into his life by habit, 
that he would expect the pleasure of her society 
without thinking much about it. Latterly, he never 
thought of her without thinking of Ruth, and if he 
gave the subject any attention, it was probably in 
an undefined consciousness that he had her sym- 
pathy in his love, and that she was always willing 
to hear him talk about it. If he ever wondered 
that Alice herself was not in love and never spoke 
of the possibility of her own marriage, it was a 
transient thought—for love did not seem _ neces- 
sary, exactly, to one so calm and evenly balanced 
and with so many resources in herself. 

Whatever her thoughts may have been they were 
unknown to Philip, as they are to these historians; 
if she was seeming to be what she was not, and 
carrying a burden heavier than any one else carried, 
because she had to bear it alone, she was only doing 
what thousands of women do, with a self-renuncia- - 
tion and heroism of which men, impatient and com- 
plaining, have no conception. Have not these big) 
babies with beards filled all literature with their out- 
cries, their griefs, and their lamentations? It is 

192 


Mt GILDED AGE 


always the gentle sex which is hard and cruel and 
fickle and implacable. 

“Do you think you would be contented to live 
in Fallkill, and attend the county court?’ asked 
Alice, when Philip had opened the budget of his 
new program. 

“Perhaps not always,” said Philip, “I might go 
and practise in Boston, maybe, or go to Chicago.” 

“Or you might get elected to Congress.” 

Philip looked at Alice to see if she was in earnest 
and not chaffing him. Her face was quite sober. 
Alice was one of those patriotic women in the rural 
districts, who think men are still selected for Con- 
gress on account of qualifications for the office. 

“No,” said Philip, ‘‘the chances are that a man 
cannot get into Congress now without resorting to 
arts and means that should render him unfit to go 
there; of course, there are exceptions; but do you 
know that I could not go into politics if I were a 
lawyer without losing standing somewhat in my 
profession, and without raising at least a suspicion 
of my intentions and unselfishness? Why, it is tele- 
graphed all over the country and commented on as 
something wonderful if a Congressman votes hon- 
estly and unselfishly and refuses to take advantage 
of his position to steal from the government.” 

“But,” insisted Alice, ‘‘I should think it a noble 
ambition to go to Congress, if it is so bad, and help 
reform it. I don’t believe it is as corrupt as the 
English Parliament used to be, if there is any truth 
in the novels, and I suppose that is reformed.” 

‘I’m sure I don’t know where the reform is to 

193 


MARK TWAIN 


begin. I’ve seen a perfectly capable, honest man, 
time and again, run against an illiterate trickster, 
and get beaten. I suppose if the people wanted | 
_ decent members of Congress they would elect them. 
’Perhaps,”’ continued Philip, with a smile, ‘‘the 
women will have to vote.” 

‘Well, I should be willing to, if it were a neces- 
sity, just as I would go to war and do what I could, 
if the country couldn’t be saved otherwise,” said 
Alice, with a spirit that surprised Philip, well as he 
thought he knew her. ‘“‘If I were a young gentle- 
man in these times—”’ 

Philip laughed outright. ‘It’s just what Ruth 
used to say, ‘if she were a man.’ [ wonder if all 
the young ladies are contemplating a change of sex.”’ 

‘‘No, only a changed sex,”’ retorted Alice; ‘“‘we 
contemplate for the most part young men who don’t 
care for anything they ought to care for.” 

- ‘Well,’’ said Philip, looking humble, ‘‘I care for 
some things, you and Ruth, for instance: perhaps I 
ought to care for Congress and that sort of thing.” 

‘‘Don’t be a goose, Philip. I heard from Ruth 
yesterday.” 

‘‘Can I see her letter?’’ 

‘*No, indeed. But I am afraid her hard work is 
telling on her, together with her anxiety about her 
father.” 

‘Do you think, Alice,’”’ asked Philip, with one of 
those selfish thoughts that are not seldom mixed 
with real love, ‘‘that Ruth prefers her profession to 
—to marriage?”’ 

‘‘Philip,’”’? exclaimed Alice, rising to quit the 

194 


THE GILDED AGE 


room, and speaking hurriedly as if the words were 
forced from her, “‘you are as blind as a bat: Ruth 
would cut off her right hand for you this minute.”’ 

Philip never noticed that Alice’s face was flushed 
and that her voice was unsteady; he only thought of 
the delicious words he had heard. And the poor 
girl, loyal to Ruth, loyal to Philip, went straight to 
her room, locked the door, threw herself on the bed, 
and sobbed as if her heart would break. And then 
she prayed that her Father in Heaven would give 
her strength. And after a time she was calm again, 
and went to her bureau drawer and took from a 
hiding-place a little piece of paper, yellow with age. 
Upon it was pinned a four-leaved clover, dry and 
yellow also. She looked long at this foolish me- 
mento. Under the clover leaf was written in a 
school-girl’s hand—‘‘Philip, June, 186—.” 

Squire Montague thought very well of Philip’s 
proposal. It would have been better if he had be- 
gun the study of the law as soon as he left college, 
but it was not too late now, and besides he had 
gathered some knowledge of the world. 

“But,” asked the Squire, ‘‘do you mean to aban- 
don your land in Pennsylvania?’ ‘This tract of 
land seemed an immense possible fortune to this 
New England lawyer-farmer. ‘‘Hasn’t it good 
timber, and doesn’t the railroad almost touch it?” 

‘I can’t do anything with it now. Perhaps I can 
some time.”’ 

‘‘What is your reason for supposing that there is 
coal “there?” 

‘‘The opinion of the best geologist I could con- 

195 


MARK TWAIN 


sult, my own observation of the country, and the 
little veins of it we found. I feel certain it is there. 
I shall find it some day. I know it. If I can only 
keep the land till I make money enough to try again.”’ 

Philip took from his pocket a map of the anthra- 
cite-coal region, and pointed out the position of the 
Ilium mountain which he had begun to tunnel. 

‘“‘Doesn’t it look like it?” 

“It certainly does,’ said the Squire, very much 
interested. It is not unusual for a quiet country 
gentleman to be more taken with such a venture 
than a speculator who has had more experience in 
its uncertainty. It was astonishing how many New 
England clergymen, in the time of the petroleum 
excitement, took chances in oil. The Wall Street 
brokers are said to do a good deal of small business 
for country clergymen, who are moved, no doubt, 
with the laudable desire of purifying the New York 
stock board. 

‘‘T don’t see that there is much risk,” said the 
Squire, at length. ‘‘The timber is worth more than 
the mortgage; and if that coal-seam does run there, 
it’s a magnificent fortune. Would you like to try it 
again in the spring, Phil?” 

Like to try it! If he could have a little help, he 
would work himself, with pick and barrow, and live 
on a crust. Only give him one more chance. 

And this is how it came about that the cautious 
old Squire Montague was drawn into this young 
fellow’s speculation, and began to have his serene 
old age disturbed by anxieties and by the hope of a 
great stroke of luck. 

196 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘‘To be sure, I only care about it for the boy,”’ 
he said. The Squire was like everybody else; 
sooner or later he must ‘‘take a chance.”’ 

It is probably on account of the lack of enterprise 
in women that they are not so fond of stock specu- 
lations and mine ventures as men. It is only when 
woman becomes demoralized that she takes to any 
sort of gambling. Neither Alice nor Ruth was 
much elated with the prospect of Philip’s renewal 
of his mining enterprise. 

But Philip was exultant. He wrote to Ruth as if 
his fortune were already made, and as if the clouds 
that lowered over the house of Bolton were already 
in the deep bosom of a coal-mine buried. Toward 
spring he went to Philadelphia with his plans all 
matured for a new campaign. His enthusiasm was 
irresistible. 

‘Philip has come, Philip has come,” cried the 
children, as if some great good had again come into 
the household; and the refrain even sang itself over 
in Ruth’s heart as she went the weary hospital 
rounds. Mr. Bolton felt more courage than he had 
had in months, at the sight of his manly face and 
the sound of his cheery voice. | 

Ruth’s course was vindicated now, and it certainly 
did not become Philip, who had nothing to offer 
but a future chance against the visible result of her 
determination and industry, to open an argument 
with her. Ruth was never more certain that she 
was right and that she was sufficient unto herself. 
She, maybe, did not much heed the still small voice 
that sang in her maiden heart as she went about her 

197 


MARK TWAIN 


work, and which lightened it and made it easy, 
‘“Philip has come.” 

‘‘T am glad for father’s sake,” she said to Philip, 
‘‘that thee has come. I can see that he depends 
greatly upon what thee can do. He thinks women 
won’t hold out long,’’ added Ruth, with the smile 
that Philip never exactly understood. 

‘‘And aren’t you tired sometimes of the struggle?” 

‘“Tired? Yes, everybody is tired, I suppose. 
But it is a glorious profession. And would you 
want me to be dependent, Philip?’’ 

‘‘Well, yes, a little,’ said Philip, feeling his way 
toward what he wanted to say. 

‘‘On what, for instance, just now?’ asked Ruth, 
a little maliciously, Philip thought. 

‘““Why, on—’” he couldn’t quite say it, for it 
occurred to him that he was a poor stick for any- 
body to lean on in the present state of his fortune, 
and that the woman before him was at least as 
independent as he was. 

‘‘T don’t mean depend,” he began again. “But 
I love you, that’s all. Am I nothing to you?” And 
Philip looked a little defiant, and as if he had said 
something that ought to brush away all the sophis- 
tries of obligation on either side, between man and 
woman. | 

Perhaps Ruth saw this. Perhaps she saw that 
her own theories of a certain equality of power, 
which ought to precede a union of two hearts, might 
be pushed too far. Perhaps she had felt sometimes 
her own weakness and the need after all of so dear 
a sympathy and so tender an interest confessed, as 

198 


THE GILDED AGE 


that which Philip could give. Whatever moved her 
—the riddle is as old as creation—she simply looked 
up to Philip and said in a low voice: 

‘‘Everything.”’ 

And Philip clasping both her hands in his, and 
looking down into her eyes, which drank in all 
his tenderness with the thirst of a true woman’s 
aie — 

“Oh! Philip, come out here,’”’ shouted young Eli, 
throwing the door wide open. 

And Ruth escaped away to her room, her heart 
singing again, and now as if it would burst for joy, 
“Philip has come.”’ 

That night Philip received a despatch from Harry 
—‘‘The trial begins to-morrow.” 


CHAPTER XX 


CONGRESSIONAL PRELIMINARIES. SELLERS JUSTLY 
OFFENDED 


Mpethie ou sagar lou nga thia gawantou kone yoboul goube. 
Wolof Proverb. 


““Mitsoda eb volna a’ te szolgad, hogy illyen nagy dolgot 
tselekednek?”’ Kirdlyok II. K. 8. 13. 


Des 18—, found Washington Hawkins 
and Colonel Sellers once more at the Capitol of 
the nation, standing guard over the University bill. 
The former gentleman was despondent, the latter 
hopeful. Washington’s distress of mind was chiefly 
on Laura’s account. The court would soon sit to 
try her case, he said, and consequently a great deal 
of ready money would be needed in the engineering 
of it. The University bill was sure to pass, this 
time, and that would make money plenty, but might 
not the help come too late? Congress had only just 
assembled, and delays were to be feared. 

*“Well,’”’ said the Colonel, ‘‘I don’t know but you 
are more or less right, there. Now let’s figure up a 
little on the preliminaries. I think Congress al- 
ways tries to do as near right as it can, according 
to its lights. A man can’t ask any fairer than that. 
The first preliminary it always starts out on, is to 
clean itself, so to speak. It will arraign two or 

200 


THE GILDED AGE 


three dozen of its members, or maybe four or five 
dozen, for taking bribes to vote for this and that 
and the other bill last winter.” 

“It goes up into the dozens, does it?” 

“Well, yes; in a free country like ours, where 
any man can run for Congress and anybody can 
vote for him, you can’t expect immortal purity all 
the time—it ain’t in nature. Sixty or eighty or a 
hundred and fifty people are bound to get in who 
are not angels in disguise, as young Hicks the corre- 
spondent, says; but still it is a very good average; 
very good, indeed. As long as it averages as well 
as that, I think we can feel very well satisfied. Even 
in these days, when people growl so much and the 
newspapers are so out of patience, there is still a very 
respectable minority of honest men in Congress.” 

““Why, a respectable minority of honest men can’t 
do any good, Colonel.”’ 

‘Oh, yes it can, too.” 

“Why, how?” 

‘Oh, in many ways, many ways.” 

‘“But what are the ways?” 

“Well—I don’t know—it is a question that 
requires time; a body can’t answer every question 
right offhand. But it does do good. I am satisfied 
of that.” 

‘‘All right, then; grant that it does good; go on 
with the preliminaries.”’ 

“That is what I am coming to. First, as I said, 
they will try a lot of members for taking money for 
votes. That will take four weeks.”’ 

‘Ves, that’s like last year; and it is a sheer waste 

201 


MARK TWAIN 


of the time for which the nation pays those men to 
work—that is what that is. And it pinches when a 
body’s got a bill waiting.” 

‘‘A waste of time, to purify the fountain of pub- 
lic law? Well, I never heard anybody express an 
idea like that before. But if it were, it would still 
be the fault of the minority, for the majority don’t 
institute these proceedings. There is where that 
minority becomes an obstruction—but still one can’t 
say it is on the wrong side. Well, after they have 
finished the bribery cases, they will take up cases of 
members who have bought their seats with money. 
That will take another four weeks.” 

“Very good; go on. You have accounted for 
two-thirds of the session.” 

“‘Next they will try each other for various smaller 
irregularities, like the sale of appointments to West 
Point cadetships, and that sort of thing—mere 
trifling pocket-money enterprises that might better 
be passed over in silence, perhaps; but then one of 
our Congresses can never rest easy till it has thor- 
oughly purified itself of all blemishes—and that is 
a thing to be applauded.”’ 

“How long does it take to disinfect itself of these 
minor impurities?” 

‘Well, about two weeks, generally.” 

‘So Congress always lies helpless in eueeuanaing 
ten weeks of a session. That’s encouraging. Col- 
onel, poor Laura will never get any benefit from our 
bill. Her trial will be over before Congress has half 
purified itself. And doesn’t it occur to you that by 
the time it has expelled all its impure members there 

202 


THE GILDED AGE 


may not be enough members left to do business 
legally ?”’ 

“Why, I did not say Congress would expel any- 
body.” 

“Well, won’t it expel anybody?” 

“‘Not necessarily. Did it last year? It never 
does. That would not be regular.’’ 

‘‘Then why waste all the session in that tom- 
foolery of trying members ?”’ 

“It is usual; it is customary; the country re- 
quires it.”’ 

‘“Then the country is a fool, J think.” 

“Oh, no. The country thinks somebody is going 
to be expelled.” 

‘“Well, when nobody 1s expelled, what does the 
country think then?” 

‘“‘By that time, the thing has strung out so long 
that the country is sick and tired of it and glad to 
have a change on any terms. But all that inquiry is 
not lost. It has a good moral effect.”’ 

‘‘Who does it have a good moral effect on?” 

‘‘Well—I don’t know. On foreign countries, I 
think. We have always been under the gaze of 
foreign countries. There is no country in the world, 
sir, that pursues corruption as inveterately as we do. 
There is no country in the world whose representa- 
tives try each other as much as ours do, or stick to 
it as long on a stretch. I think there is something 
great in being a model for the whole civilized world, 
Washington.” 

‘You don’t mean a model; you mean an ex- 
ample.” 

203 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Well, it’s all the same; it’s just the same thing. 
It shows that a man can’t be corrupt in this country 
without sweating for it, I can tell you that.” 

‘‘Hang it, Colonel, you just said we never punish 
anybody for villainous practices.”’ 

‘‘But, good God! we try them, don’t we? Is it 
nothing to show a disposition to sift things and bring 
people to a strict account? I tell you it has its 
effect.” : 

‘‘Oh, bother the effect!—What is it they do do? 
How do they proceed? You know perfectly well— 
and it is all bosh, too. Come, now, how do they 
proceed ?”’ 

‘‘Why they proceed right and regular—and it 
ain’t bosh, Washington, it ain’t bosh. They ap- 
point a committee to investigate, and that committee 
hears evidence three weeks, and all the witnesses on 
one side swear that the accused took money or stock 
or something for his vote. Then the accused stands 
up and testifies that he may have done it, but he 
was receiving and handling a good deal of money at 
the time and he doesn’t remember this particular cir- 
cumstance—at least with sufficient distinctness to 
enable him to grasp it tangibly. So of course the 
thing is not proven—and that is what they say 
in the verdict. They don’t acquit, they don’t con- 
demn. They just say, ‘Charge not proven.’ It 
leaves the accused in a kind of a shaky condition 
before the country, it purifies Congress, it satisfies 
everybody, and it doesn’t seriously hurt anybody. 
It has taken a long time to perfect our system, but 
it is the most admirable in the world now.” 

204 


THE GILDED AGE 


“So one of those long stupid investigations al- 
ways turns out in that lame silly way. Yes, you 
are correct. I thought maybe you viewed the 
matter differently from other people. Do you think 
a Congress of ours could convict the devil of any- 
thing if he were a member?”’ 

“‘My dear boy, don’t let these damaging delays 
prejudice you against Congress. Don’t use such 
strong language; you talk like a newspaper. Con- 
gress has inflicted frightful punishments on its mem- 
bers—now you know that. When they tried Mr. 
Fairoaks, and a cloud of witnesses proved him to 
be—well, you know what they proved him to be— 
and his own testimony and his own confessions 
gave him the same character, what did Congress do 
then *—come!”’ 

“Well, what did Congress do?” 

“You know what Congress did, Washington. 
Congress intimated plainly enough, that they con- 
sidered him almost a stain upon their body; and 
without waiting ten days, hardly, to think the thing 
over, they rose up and hurled at him a resolution 
declaring that they disapproved of his conduct! 
Now you know that, Washington.” 

“It was a terrific thing—there is no denying 
that. If he had been proven guilty of theft, arson, 
licentiousness, infanticide, and defiling graves, I be- 
lieve they would have suspended him for two days.” 

‘You can depend on it, Washington. Congress 
is vindictive, Congress is savage, sir, when it gets 
waked up once. It will go to any length to vindi- 
cate its honor at such a time.” 

205 


MARK TWAIN 


“Ah, well, we have talked the morning through, 
just as usual in these tiresome days of waiting, and 
we have reached the same old result; that is to say, 
we are no better off than when we began. The land 
bill is just as far away as ever, and the trial is closer 
at hand. Let’s give up everything and die.” 

*‘Die and leave the Duchess to fight it out all 
alone? Oh, no, that won’t do. Come, now, don’t 
talk so. It is all going to come out right. Now 
you'll see.” 

“Tt never will, Colonel, never in the world. 
Something tells me that. I get more tired and 
more despondent every day. I don’t see any hope; 
life is only just a trouble. J am so miserable these 
days!’ 

The Colonel made Washington get up and walk 
the floor with him, arm in arm. The good old 
speculator wanted to comfort him, but he hardly 
knew how to go about it. He made many attempts, 
but they were lame; they lacked spirit; the words 
were encouraging, but they were only words—he 
could not get any heart into them. “He could not 
always warm up, now, with the-old Hawkeye fervor. 
By and by his lips trembled and his voice got un- 
steady. He said: 

‘Don’t give up the ship, my boy—don’t do it. 
The wind’s bound to fetch around and set in our 
favor. I know it.” 

And the prospect was so cheerful that he wept. 
Then he blew a trumpet-blast that started the 
meshes of his handkerchief, and said in almost his 
breezy old-time way: 

206 


THE "GILDED AGE 


‘“‘Lord bless us, this is all nonsense! Night 
doesn’t last always; day has got to break some time 
or other. Every silver lining has a cloud behind 
it, as the poet says; and that remark has always 
cheered me, though I never could see any meaning 
to it. Everybody uses it, though, and everybody 
gets comfort out of it. I wish they would start 
something fresh. Come, now, let’s cheer up; there’s 
been as good fish in the sea as there are now. It 
shall never be said that Beriah Sellers— Come in!’” 

It was the telegraph-boy. The Colonel reached 
for the message and devoured its contents. 

“‘T said it! Never give up the ship! The trial’s 
postponed till February, and we'll save the child 
yet. Bless my life, what lawyers they have in New 
York! Give them money to fight with, and the 
ghost of an’ excuse, and they would manage to post- 
pone anything in this world, unless it might be the 
millennium or something like that. Now for work 
again, my boy. The trial will last till the middle of 
March, sure; Congress ends the fourth of March. 
Within three days of the end of the session they 
will be done putting through the preliminaries, and 
then they will be ready for national business. Our 
bill will go through in forty-eight hours, then, and 
we'll telegraph a million dollars to the jury—to the 
lawyers, I mean—and the verdict of the jury will be 
‘Accidental murder resulting from justifiable in- 
sanity’—or something to that effect, something to 
that effect. Everything is dead sure, now. Come, 
what is the matter? What are you wilting down 
like that for? You mustn’t be a girl, you know.” 

204 


MARK TWAIN 


“Oh, Colonel, I am become so used to troubles, 
so used to failures, disappointments, hard luck of 
all kinds, that a little good news breaks me right 
down. Everything has been so hopeless that now 
I can’t stand good news at all. It is too good to 
be true, anyway. Don’t you see how our bad luck 
has worked on me? My hair is getting gray, and 
many nights I don’t sleep at all. I wish it was all 
over and we could rest. I wish we could lie down 
and just forget everything, and let it all be just a 
dream that is done and can’t come back to trouble 
us any more. I am so tired.” - 

“Ah, poor child, don’t talk like that—cheer up 
—there’s daylight ahead. Don’t give up. You'll 
have Laura again, and Louise, and your mother, and 
oceans and oceans of money—and then you can go 
away, ever so far away somewhere, if you want to, 
and forget all about this infernal place. And by 
George I'll go with you! Ill go with you—now 
there’s my word on it. Cheer up. I'll run out and 
tell the friends the news.”’ 

And he wrung Washington’s hand and was about 
to hurry away when his companion, in a burst of 
grateful admiration, said: 

“‘T think you are the best soul and the noblest I 
ever knew, Colonel Sellers! and if the people only 
knew you as I do, you would not be tagging around 
here a nameless man—you would be in Congress.’ 

The gladness died out of the Colonel’s face, and 
he laid his hand upon Weskuaizton s shoulder and 
said gravely: 

“I have always been a friend of your family, 

208 


THE GILDED AGE 


Washington, and I think I have always tried to do 
right as between man and man, according to my 
lights. Now I don’t think there has ever been any- 
thing in my conduct that should make you feel justi- 
fied in saying a thing like that.” 

He turned, then, and walked slowly out, leaving 
Washington abashed and somewhat bewildered. 
When Washington had presently got his thoughts 
into line again, he said to himself, ‘‘Why, honestly, 
I only meant to compliment him—indeed, I would 
not have hurt him for the world.” 


CHAPTER XXI 
MORAL INFLUENCES TO HELP THE UNIVERSITY BILL 


Aucune chose au monde et plus noble et plus belle 


Que la sainte ferveur d’un véritable zéle. 
Le Tartufe, a. 1, sc. 6. 


With faire discourse the evening so they pas; 
For that olde man of pleasing wordes had store, 
And well could file his tongue, as smooth as glas— 


Faerte Queene. 


—TIl prit un air bénin et tendre, 
D’un Laudate Deum leur préta le bon jour, 


Puis convia le monde au fraternal amour! 
Roman du Renard (Prologue). 


HE weeks drifted by monotonously enough now. 

The “‘preliminaries’”’ continued to drag along in 
Congress, and life was a dull suspense to Sellers and 
Washington, a weary waiting which might have 
broken their hearts, maybe, but for the relieving 
change which they got out of an occasional visit to 
New York to see Laura. Standing guard in Wash- 
ington or anywhere else is not an exciting business 
in time of peace, but standing guard was all that the 
two friends had to do; all that was needed of them 
was that they should be on hand and ready for any 
emergency that might come up. ‘There was no 
work to do; that was all finished; this was but the 
second session of the last winter’s Congress, and its 

210 


THE GILDED AGE 


action on the bill could have but one result—its 
passage. The House must do its work over again, 
of course, but the same membership was there to see 
that it did it. The Senate was secure—Senator 
Dilworthy was able to put all doubts to rest on 
that head. Indeed, it was no secret in Washington 
that a two-thirds vote in the Senate was ready and 
waiting to be cast for the University bill as soon as 
it should come before that body. 

Washington did not take part in the gaieties of 
“‘the season,’’ as he had done the previous winter. 
He had lost his interest in such things; he was op- 
pressed with cares, now. Senator Dilworthy said to 
Washington that a humble deportment, under pun- 
ishment, was best, and that there was but one way 
in which the troubled heart might find perfect re- 
pose and peace. The suggestion found a response 
in Washington’s breast, and the Senator saw the sign 
of it in his face. 

From that moment one could find the youth with 
the Senator even oftener than with Colonel Sellers. 
When the statesman presided at great temperance- 
meetings, he placed Washington in the front rank 
of impressive dignitaries that gave tone to the occa- 
sion and pomp to the platform. His bald-headed 
surroundings made the youth the more conspicuous. 
When the statesman made remarks in these meetings, 
he not infrequently alluded with effect to the encour- 
aging spectacle of one of the wealthiest and most 
brilliant young favorites of society forsaking the light 
vanities of that butterfly existence to nobly and self- 
sacrificingly devote his talents and his riches to the 

211 


MARK TWAIN 


cause of saving his hapless fellow-creatures from 
shame and misery here and eternal regret hereafter. 
At the prayer-meetings the Senator always brought 
Washington up the aisle on his arm and seated him 
prominently; in his prayers he referred to him in 
the cant terms which the Senator employed, perhaps 
unconsciously, and mistook, maybe, for religion, 
and in other ways brought him into notice. He had 
him out at gatherings for the benefit of the negro, 
gatherings for the benefit of the Indian, gatherings 
for the benefit of the heathen in distant lands. He 
had him out time and again, before Sunday-schools, 
as an example for emulation. Upon all these oc- 
casions the Senator made casual references to many 
benevolent enterprises which his ardent young friend 
was planning against the day when the passage of 
the University bill should make his ample means 
available for the amelioration of the condition of the 
unfortunate among his fellow-men of all nations and 
all climes. Thus, as the weeks rolled on, Washington 
grew up into an imposing lion once more, but a lion 
that roamed the peaceful fields of religion and tem- 
perance, and revisited the glittering domain of fash- 
ion no more. A great moral influence was thus 
brought to bear in favor of the bill; the weightiest 
of friends flocked to its standard; its most energetic 
enemies said it was useless to fight longer; they had 
tacitly surrendered while as yet the day of battle 
was not come. 


CHAPTER XXII 


DILWORTHY AT SAINT’S REST, PREPARES FOR 
RE-ELECTION 


—He seekes, of all his drifte the aymed end: 
Thereto his subtile engins he does bend, 
His practick witt and his fayre fyléd tongue, 
With thousand other sleightes; for well he kend 
His credit now in doubtful ballaunce hong: 
For hardly could bee hurt, who was already stong. 


Faerie Queene. 


Selons divers besoins, il est une science 
D’étendre les liens de notre conscience, 
Et de rectifier le mal de l’action 

Avec la pureté de notre intention. 


Le Tartufe, a. 4, $c. §. 

HE session was drawing toward its close. Sena- 

tor Dilworthy thought he would run out West 
and shake hands with his constituents and let them 
look at him. The legislature whose duty it would 
be to re-elect him to the United States Senate was 
already in session. Mr. Dilworthy considered his 
re-election certain, but he was a careful, painstaking 
man, and if, by visiting his state, he could find the 
opportunity to persuade a few more legislators to 
vote for him, he held the journey to be well worth 
taking. The University bill was safe, now; he 
could leave it without fear; it needed his presence 
and his watching no longer. But there was a per- 

213 


MARK TWAIN 


son in his state legislature who did need watching 
—a person who, Senator Dilworthy said, was a 
narrow, grumbling, uncomfortable malcontent—a 
person who was stolidly opposed to reform, and 
progress and him—a person who, he feared, had been 
bought with money to combat him, and through him 
the commonwealth’s welfare and its political purity. 

‘“‘Tf this person Noble,” said Mr. Dilworthy, in a 
little speech at a dinner-party given him by some of 
his admirers, ‘‘merely desired to sacrifice me, I 
would willingly offer up my political life on the 
altar of my dear state’s weal, I would be glad and 
grateful to do it; but when he makes of me but a 
cloak to hide his deeper designs, when he proposes 
to strike through me at the heart of my beloved state, 
all the lion in me is aroused—and I say, Here I 
stand, solitary and alone, but unflinching, unquail- 
ing, thrice armed with my sacred trust; and whoso 
passes, to do evil to this fair domain that looks to 
me for protection, must do so over my dead body.” 

He further said that if this Noble were a pure 
man, and merely misguided, he could bear it, but 
that he should succeed in his wicked designs through 
a base use of money would leave a blot upon his 
state which would work untold evil to the morals of 
the people, and that he would not suffer; the public 
morals must not be contaminated. He would seek 
this man Noble; he would argue, he would persuade, 
he would appeal to his honor. 

When he arrived on the ground he found his 
friends unterrified; they were standing firmly by 
him and were full of courage. Noble was working 


214 


THE GILDED AGE 


hard, too, but matters were against him; he was 
not making much progress. Mr. Dilworthy took an 
early opportunity to send for Mr. Noble; he had a 
midnight interview with him, and urged him to 
forsake his evil ways; he begged him to come again 
and again, which he did. He finally sent the man 
away at three o’clock one morning; and when he was 
gone, Mr. Dilworthy said to himself: 

‘“‘I feel a good deal relieved, now, a great deal 
relieved.” 

The Senator now turned his attention to matters 
touching the souls of his people. He appeared in 
church; he took a leading part in prayer-meetings; 
he met and encouraged the temperance societies; he 
graced the sewing-circles of the ladies with his 
presence, and even took a needle now and then and 
made a stitch or two upon a calico shirt for some poor 
Bibleless pagan of the South Seas, and this act 
enchanted the ladies, who regarded the garments 
thus honored as in a manner sanctified. ‘The Sena- 
tor wrought in Bible classes, and nothing could keep 
him away from the Sunday-schools—neither sick- 
ness nor storms nor weariness. He even traveled a 
tedious thirty miles in a poor little rickety stage- 
coach to comply with the desire of the miserable 
hamlet of Cattleville that he would let its Sunday- 
school look upon him. 

All the town was assembled at the stage office 
when he arrived, two bonfires were burning, and a 
battery of anvils was popping exultant broadsides; 
for a United States Senator was a sort of god in the 
understanding of these people, who never had seen 

215 


MARK TWAIN 


any creature mightier than a county judge. To 
them a United States Senator was a vast, vague 
colossus, an awe-inspiring unreality. 

Next day, everybody was at the village church a 
full half-hour before time for Sunday-school to open; 
ranchmen and farmers had come with their families 
from five miles around, all eager to get a glimpse 
of the great man—the man who had been to Wash- 
ington; the man who had seen the President of the 
United States, and had even talked with him; the 
man who had seen the actual Washington Monument 
—perhaps touched it with his hands. 

When the Senator arrived the church was crowded, 
the windows were full, the aisles were packed, so 
was the vestibule, and so, indeed, was the yard in 
front of the building. As he worked his way 
through to the pulpit on the arm of the minister 
and followed by the envied officials of the village, 
every neck was stretched and every eye twisted 
around intervening obstructions to get a glimpse. 
Elderly people directed each other’s attention and 
said, ‘‘There! that’s him, with the grand, noble 
forehead!’ Boys nudged each other and said, 
‘Hi, Johnny, here he is! There, that’s him, with 
the peeled head!’’ 

The Senator took his seat in the pulpit, with the 
minister on one side of him and the superintendent 
of the Sunday-school on the other. The town 
dignitaries sat in an impressive row within the altar 
railings below. The Sunday-school children occu- 
pied ten of the front benches, dressed in their best 
and most uncomfortable clothes, and with hair 

216 


THE GILDED AGE 


combed and faces too clean to feel natural. So 
awed were they by the presence of a living United 
States Senator, that during three minutes not a 
‘‘spit-ball’”’? was thrown. After that they began to 
come to themselves by degrees, and presently the 
spell was wholly gone and they were reciting verses 
and pulling hair. 

The usual Sunday-school exercises were hurried 
through, and then the minister got up and bored 
the house with a speech built on the customary 
Sunday-school plan; then the superintendent put 
in his oar; then the town dignitaries had their say. 
They all made complimentary reference to ‘‘their 
friend, the Senator,’’ and told what a great and illus- 
trious man he was and what he had done for his 
country and for religion and temperance, and ex- 
horted the little boys to be good and diligent and 
try to become like him some day. The speakers won 
the deathless hatred of the house by these delays, 
but at last there was an end and hope revived; 
inspiration was about to find utterance. 

Senator Dilworthy rose and beamed upon the 
assemblage for a full minute in silence. Then he 
smiled with an access of sweetness upon the children 
and began: 

‘“‘My little friends—for I hope that all these 
bright-faced little people are my friends and will let 
me be their friend—my little friends, I have traveled 
much, I have been in many cities and many states, 
everywhere in our great and noble country, and 
by the blessing of Providence I have been per- 
mitted to see many gatherings like this—but I am 

217 


MARK TWAIN 


proud, I am truly proud to say that I never have 
looked upon so much intelligence, so much grace, 
such sweetness of disposition as I see in the charm- 
ing young countenances I see before me at this 
moment. I have been asking myself, as I sat here, 
Where am IJ? Am I in some far-off monarchy, 
looking upon little princes and princesses? No. 
Am I in some populous center of my own country, 
where the choicest children of the land have been 
selected and brought together as at a fair for a 
prize? No. Am I in some strange foreign clime 
where the children are marvels that we know not 
of? No. Then where am I? Yes—where am I[? 
I am in a simple, remote, unpretending settlement 
of my own dear state, and these are the children of 
the noble and virtuous men who have made me what 
Tam! My soul is lost in wonder at the thought! 
And I humbly thank Him to whom we are but as 
worms of the dust, that He has been pleased to call 
me to serve such men! Earth has no higher, 
no grander position for me. Let kings and em- 
perors keep their tinsel crowns, I want them not; 
my heart is here! 

‘‘Again I thought, Is this a theater? No. Is it 
a concert or a gilded opera? No. Is it some other 
vain, brilliant, beautiful temple of soul-staining 
amusement and hilarity? No. Then what is it? 
What did my consciousness reply? I ask you, my 
little friends, What did my consciousness reply? It 
replied, It is the temple of the Lord! Ah, think of 
that, now. I could hardly keep the tears back, I 
was so grateful. Oh, how beautiful it is to see 

218 


THE GILDED AGE 


these ranks of sunny little faces assembled here to 
learn the way of life; to learn to be good; to learn 
to be useful; to learn to be pious; to learn to be 
great and glorious men and women; to learn to be 
props and pillars of the state and shining lights in 
the councils and the households of the nation; to be 
bearers of the banner and soldiers of the cross in the 
rude campaigns of life, and ransomed souls in the 
happy fields of Paradise hereafter. 

“Children, honor your parents and be grateful to 
them for providing for you the precious privileges 
of a Sunday-school. 

“‘Now, my dear little friends, sit up straight and 
pretty—there, that’s it—and give me your attention 
and let me tell you about a poor little Sunday- 
school scholar I once knew. He lived in the Far 
West, and his parents were poor. They could not 
give him a costly education, but they were good and 
wise and they sent him to the Sunday-school. He 
loved the Sunday-school. I hope you love your 
Sunday-school—ah, I see by your faces that you 
qo. fat is right. 

“Well, this poor little boy was always in his 
place when the bell rang, and he always knew his 
lesson; for his teachers wanted him to learn and he 
loved his teachers dearly. Always love your teach- 
ers, my children, for they love you more than you 
can know, now. He would not let bad boys per- 
suade him to go to play on Sunday. There was one 
little bad boy who was always trying to persuade 
him, but he never could. 

‘So this poor little boy grew up to be a man, 

219 


MARK TWAIN 


and had to go out in the world, far from home and 
friends, to earn his living. —Temptations lay all about 
him, and sometimes he was about to yield, but he 
would think of some precious lesson he learned in 
his Sunday-school a long time ago, and that would 
save him. By and by he was elected to the legis- 
lature. Then he did everything he could for Sunday- 
schools. He got laws passed for them; he got 
Sunday-schools established wherever he could. 

“‘And by and by the people made him governor 
—and he said it was all owing to the Sunday-school. 

“‘After a while the people elected him a Repre- 
sentative to the Congress of the United States, and 
he grew very famous. Now temptations assailed 
him on every hand. People tried to get him to 
drink wine, to dance, to go to theaters; they even 
tried to buy his vote; but no, the memory of his 
Sunday-school saved him from all harm; he remem- 
bered the fate of the bad little boy who used to try 
to get him to play on Sunday, and who grew up and 
became a drunkard and was hanged. He remem- 
bered that, and was glad he never yielded and 
played on Sunday. 

“Well, at last, what do you think happened? 
Why the people gave him a towering, illustrious 
position, a grand, imposing position. And what do 
you think it was? What should you say it was, 
children? It was Senator of the United States! 
That poor little boy that loved his Sunday-school 
became that man. That man stands before you! 
All that he is, he owes to the Sunday-school. 

‘‘My precious children, love your parents, love 

220 


THE GILDED AGE 


your teachers, love your Sunday-school, be pious, 
be obedient, be honest, be diligent, and then you 
will succeed in life and be honored of all men. 
Above all things, my children, be honest. Above 
all things be pure-minded as the snow. Let us join 
in prayer.” 

When Senator Dilworthy departed from Cattle- 
ville, he left three dozen boys behind him arranging 
a campaign of life whose objective point was the 
United States Senate. 

When he arrived at the state capital at midnight 
Mr. Noble came and held a three hours’ conference 
with him, and then as he was about leaving said: 

‘“‘T’ve worked hard, and I’ve got them at last. 
Six of them haven’t got quite backbone enough to 
slew around and come right out for you on the first 
ballot to-morrow, but they’re going to vote against 
you on the first for the sake of appearances, and 
then come out for you all in a body on the second— 
I’ve fixed all that! By supper-time to-morrow you'll 
be re-elected. You can go to bed and sleep easy 
on that.” 

After Mr. Noble was gone, the Senator said: 

‘‘Well, to bring about a complexion of things like 
this was worth coming West for.”’ 


CHAPTER XXIII 


LAURA’S TRIAL. AN INTELLIGENT JURY AND MODEL 
JUDGE 


dame serfaut ater a anfet gente 
aitat setamat aa uarreuaiia: - 
Sénkhya Kartké, xviii. 
Ny byd ynat nep yr dysc; yr adysco dyn byth ny byd ynat 
ony byd doethineb yny callon; yr doethet uyth uo dyn ny byd 


ynat ony byd dysc gyt ar doethineb. 
Cyvreithian Cymru. 


HE case of the State of New York against Laura 

Hawkins was finally set down for trial on the 
15th day of February, less than a year after the 
shooting of George Selby. 

If the public had almost forgotten the existence of 
Laura and her crime, they were reminded of all the 
details of the murder by the newspapers, which for 
some days had been announcing the approaching 
trial. But they had not forgotten. The sex, the 
age, the beauty of the prisoner, her high social posi- 
tion in Washington, the unparalleled calmness with 
which the crime was committed, had all conspired to 
fix the event in the public mind, although nearly 
three hundred and sixty - five subsequent murders 
had occurred to vary the monotony of metropolitan 
life. 


222 


THE GILDED AGE 


No, the public read from time to time of the 
lovely prisoner, languishing in the city prison, the 
tortured victim of the law’s delay; and as the 
months went by it was natural that the horror of 
her crime should become a little indistinct in mem- 
ory, while the heroine of it should be invested with 
a sort of sentimental interest. Perhaps her counsel 
had calculated on this. Perhaps it was by their 
advice that Laura had interested herself in the un- 
fortunate criminals who shared her prison confine- 
ment, and had done not a little to relieve, from her 
own purse, the necessities of some of the poor 
creatures. That she had done this, the public read 
in the journals of the day, and the simple announce- 
ment cast a softening light upon her character. 

The courtroom was crowded at an early hour, 
before the arrival of judges, lawyers, and prisoner. 
There is no enjoyment so keen to certain minds as 
that of looking upon the slow torture of a human 
being on trial for life, except it be an execution; 
there is no display of human ingenuity, wit, and 
power so fascinating as that made by trained lawyers 
in the trial of an important case, nowhere else is 
exhibited such subtlety, acumen, address, eloquence. 

All the conditions of intense excitement meet in a 
murder trial. The awful issue at stake gives signifi- 
cance to the lightest word or look. How the quick 
eyes of the spectators rove from the stolid jury to 
the keen lawyers, the impassive judge, the anxious 
prisoner. Nothing is lost of the sharp wrangle of 
the counsel on points of law, the measured decisions 
of the bench, the duels between the attorneys and 

223 


MARK TWAIN 


the witnesses. The crowd sways with the rise and 
fall of the shifting testimony, in sympathetic interest, 
and hangs upon the dicta of the judge in breathless 
silence. It speedily takes sides for or against the 
accused, and recognizes as quickly its favorites 
among the lawyers. Nothing delights it more than 
the sharp retort of a witness and the discomfiture of 
an obnoxious attorney. A joke, even if it be a lame 
one, is nowhere so keenly relished or quickly ap- 
plauded as in a murder trial. 

Within the bar the young lawyers and the privi- 
leged hangers-on filled all the chairs except those 
reserved at the table for those engaged in the case. 
Without, the throng occupied all the seats, the win- 
dow-ledges, and the standing-room. ‘The atmosphere 
was already something horrible. It was the peculiar 
odor of a criminal court, as if it were tainted by the 
presence, in different persons, of all the crimes that 
men and women can commit. 

There was a little stir when the prosecuting at- 
torney, with two assistants, made his way in, seated 
himself at the table, and spread his papers before 
him. There was more stir when the counsel of the 
defense appeared. They were Mr. Braham, the 
senior, and Mr. Quiggle and Mr. O’Keefe, the 
juniors. | 

Everybody in the courtroom knew Mr. Braham, 
the great criminal lawyer, and he was not unaware 
that he was the object of all eyes as he moved to his 
place, bowing to his friends in the bar. A large but 
rather spare man, with broad shoulders and a mas- 
sive head, covered with chestnut curls which fell 

224 


Dre G TL De rAGE 


down upon his coat-collar and which he had a habit 
of shaking as a lion is supposed-to shake his mane. 
His face was clean-shaven, and he had a wide mouth 
and rather small dark eyes, set quite too near 
together. Mr. Braham wore a brown frock - coat 
buttoned across his breast, with a rosebud in the 
upper buttonhole, and light pantaloons. A diamond 
stud was seen to flash from his bosom, and as he 
seated himself and drew off his gloves a heavy seal- 
ring was displayed upon his white left hand. Mr. 
Braham having seated himself, deliberately surveyed 
the entire house, made a remark to one of his assist- 
ants, and then taking an ivory-handled knife from 
his pocket began to pare his finger-nails, rocking his 
chair backward and forward slowly. 

A moment later Judge O’Shaunnessy entered at 
the rear door and took his seat in one of the chairs 
behind the bench; a gentleman in black broadcloth, 
with sandy hair, inclined to curl, a round, reddish 
and rather jovial face, sharp rather than intellectual, 
and with a self-sufficient air. His career had nothing 
remarkable in it. He was descended from a long 
line of Irish Kings, and he was the first one of 
them who had ever come into his kingdom—the 
kingdom of such being the city of New York. He 
had, in fact, descended so far and so low that he 
found himself, when a boy, a sort of street Arab in 
that city; but he had ambition and native shrewd- 
ness, and he speedily took to boot-polishing, and 
newspaper-hawking, became the office and errand 
boy of a law firm, picked up knowledge enough to 
get some employment in police courts, was admitted 

225 


MARK TWAIN 


to the bar, became a rising young politician, went to 
the legislature, and was finally elected to the bench 
which he now honored. In this democratic country 
he was obliged to conceal his royalty under a 
plebeian aspect. Judge O’Shaunnessy never had a 
lucrative practice nor a large salary, but he had 
prudently laid away money—believing that a de- 
pendent judge can never be impartial—and he had 
lands and houses to the value of three or four hun- 
dred thousand dollars. Had he not helped to build 
and furnish this very court-house? Did he not 
know that the very “‘spittoon’’ which his judgeship 
used cost the city the sum of one thousand dollars? 

As soon as the judge was seated, the court was 
opened, with the ‘‘oi yis, oi yis’’ of the officer in 
his native language, the case called, and the sheriff 
was directed to bring in the prisoner. In the midst 
of a profound hush Laura entered, leaning on the 
arm of the officer, and was conducted to a seat by 
her counsel. She was followed by her mother and by 
Washington Hawkins, who were given seats near her. 

Laura was very pale, but this pallor heightened 
the luster of her large eyes and gave a touching sad- 
ness to her expressive face. She was dressed in 
simple black, with exquisite taste, and without an 
ornament. The thin lace veil which partially cov- 
ered her face did not so much conceal as heighten 
her beauty. She would not have entered a drawing- 
room with more self-poise, nor a church with more 
haughty humility. There was in her manner or face 
neither shame nor boldness, and when she took her 
seat in full view of half the spectators, her eyes were 

226 


THE GILDED AGE 


downcast. A murmur of admiration ran through 
the room. The newspaper reporters made their 
pencils fly. Mr. Braham again swept his eyes over 
the house as if in approval. When Laura at length 
raised her eyes a little, she saw Philip and Harry 
within the bar, but she gave no token of recognition. 

The clerk then read the indictment, which was in 
the usual form. It charged Laura Hawkins, in 
effect, with the premeditated murder of George 
selby, by shooting him with a pistol, with a re- 
volver, shotgun, rifle, repeater, breech-loader, can- 
non, six-shooter, with a gun, or some other weapon; 
with killing him with a slung-shot, a bludgeon, 
carving-knife, bowie-knife, penknife, rolling-pin, car- 
hook, dagger, hairpin, with a hammer, with a screw- 
driver, with a nail, and with all other weapons and 
utensils whatsoever, at the Southern Hotel and in 
all other hotels and places wheresoever, on the 
thirteenth day of March and all other days of the 
Christian era whensoever. 

Laura stood while the long indictment was read, 
and at the end, in response to the inquiry of the 
judge, she said in a clear, low voice, ‘‘Not guilty.” 
She sat down and the court proceeded to impanel a 
jury. 

The first man called was Michael Lanigan, saloon- 
keeper. 

‘“Have you formed or expressed any opinion on 
this case, and do you know any of the parties?” 

‘“Not any,’’ said Mr. Lanigan. 

‘‘Have you any conscientious objections to capi- 
tal punishment?” 

227 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘No, sir, not to my knowledge.”’ 

‘‘Have you read anything about this case?” 

‘“To be sure, I read the papers, y’r Honor.”’ 

Objected to by Mr. Braham, for cause, and dis- 
charged. 

Patrick Coughlin. 

‘‘What is your business?” 

‘‘Well—I haven’t got any particular business.”’ 

‘‘Haven’t any particular business, eh? Well, 
what’s your general business? What do you do for 
a living?” 

‘‘T own some terriers, sir.”’ 

‘Own some terriers, eh? Keep a rat-pit?”’ 

‘‘Gentlemen comes there to have a little sport. J 
never fit ’em, sir.” 

“Oh, I see—you are probably the amusement 
committee of the city council. Have you ever heard 
of this case?” 

‘Not till this morning, sir.” 

“Can you read ?”’ 

‘Not fine print, y’r Honor.”’ 

The man was about to be sworn, when Mr. 
Braham asked: 

‘“Could your father read ?”’ 

‘“The old gentleman was mighty handy at that, 
sir.”’ 7 

Mr. Braham submitted that the man was disquali- 
fied. Judge thought not. Point argued. Challenged 
peremptorily, and set aside. 

Ethan Dobb, cart-driver. 

“Can you read?”’ 

““Yes, but haven’t a habit of it.” 

228 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘“‘Have you heard of this case?”’ 

‘“‘T think so—but it might be another. I have 
no opinion about it.” 

Dist. A. ‘‘Tha—tha—there! Hold on a bit! 
Did anybody tell you to say you had no opinion 
about it?” 

“Ni -n-o, sir” 

‘“Take care now, take care. Then what suggested 
it to you to volunteer that remark?” 

‘“They’ve always asked that, when I was on 
juries.”’ 

‘All right, then. Have you any conscientious 
scruples about capital punishment?” 

“Any which?” 

‘‘Would you object to finding a person guilty of 
murder on evidence?” 

“I might, sir, if I thought he wa’n’t guilty.” 

The district attorney thought he saw a point. 

‘“‘Would this feeling rather incline you against a 
capital conviction?” 

The juror said he hadn’t any feeling, and didn’t 
know any of the parties. Accepted and sworn. 

Dennis Laflin, laborer. Had neither formed nor 
expressed an opinion. Never had heard of the 
case. Believed in hangin’ for them that deserved it. 
Could read if it was necessary. 

Mr. Braham objected. The man was evidently 
bloody-minded. Challenged peremptorily. 

Larry O’Toole, contractor. A showily dressed 
man of the style known as ‘“‘vulgar genteel,”’ had a 
sharp eye and a ready tongue. Had read the news- 
paper reports of the case, but they made no impres- 

229 


MARK TWAIN 


sion on him. Should be governed by the evidence. 
Knew no reason why he could not be an impartial 
juror. 

Question by district attorney. 

‘‘How is it that the reports made no impression 
on you?” 

‘‘Never believe anything I see in the newspapers.”’ 

(Laughter from the crowd, approving smiles from 
his Honor and Mr. Braham.) Juror swornin. Mr. 
Braham whispered to O’Keefe, ‘‘That’s the man.”’ 

Avery Kicks, peanut-peddler. Did he ever hear 
of this case? The man shook his head. 

‘Can you read ?”’ 

“Ne.” 

‘‘Any scruples about capital punishment?” 

“Nios” 

He was about to be sworn, when the district at- 
torney turning to him carelessly remarked: 

‘‘Understand the nature of an oath?” 

‘Outside,’ said the man, pointing to the door. 

‘‘T say, do you know what an oath is?” 

““Five cents,”’ explained the man. 

‘‘Do you mean to insult me?” roared the prose- 
cuting officer. ‘‘Are you an idiot?” 

‘Fresh baked. I’m deefe. I don’t hear a word 
you say.” | 

The man was discharged. ‘‘He wouldn’t have 
made a bad juror, though,” whispered Braham. ‘“‘I 
saw him looking at the prisoner sympathizingly. 
That’s a point you want to watch for.” 

The result of the whole day’s work was the selec- 
tion of only two jurors. These, however, were satis- 

230 


THE GILDED AGE 


factory to Mr. Braham. He had kept off all those 
he did not know. No one knew better than this 
great criminal lawyer that the battle was fought on 
the selection of the jury. The subsequent examina- 
tion of witnesses, the eloquence expended on the 
jury are all for effect outside. At least that is the 
theory of Mr. Braham. But human nature is a 
queer thing, he admits; sometimes jurors are unac- 
countably swayed, be as careful as you can in 
choosing them. 

It was four weary days before this jury was made 
up, but when it was finally complete, it did great 
credit to the counsel for the defense. So far as Mr. 
Braham knew, only two could read, one of whom 
was the foreman, Mr. Braham’s friend, the showy 
contractor. Low foreheads and heavy faces they all 
had; some had a look of animal cunning, while the 
most were only stupid. The entire panel formed 
that boasted heritage commonly described as the 
“bulwark of our liberties.” 

The district attorney, Mr. McFlinn, opened the 
case for the state. He spoke with only the slightest 
accent, one that had been inherited but not culti- 
vated. He contented himself with a brief state- 
ment of the case. The state would prove that 
Laura Hawkins, the prisoner at the bar, a fiend in 
the form of a beautiful woman, shot dead George 
Selby, a Southern gentleman, at the time and place 
described. That the murder was in cold blood, 
deliberate and without provocation; that it had been 
long premeditated and threatened; that she had 
followed the deceased from Washington to commit 

231 


MARK TWAIN 


it. All this would be proved by unimpeachable wit- 
nesses. The attorney added that the duty of the 
jury, however painful it might be, would be plain 
and simple. They were citizens, husbands, perhaps 
fathers. They knew how insecure life had become 
in the metropolis. To-morrow their own wives 
might be widows, their own children orphans, like 
the bereaved family in yonder hotel, deprived of 
husband and father by the jealous hand of some 
murderous female. The attorney sat down, and 
the clerk called: 
‘‘Henry Brierly.”’ 


CHAPTER XXIV 
THE LEARNED COUNSEL 


“‘Dyden i Midten,” sagde Fanden, han sad imellem to Procutorer. 


Eur brefitaer brAz eo! Ha klevet hoc’h efiz-hu hé vrefit? 


ENRY BRIERLY took the stand. Requested 
by the district attorney to tell the jury all he 
knew about the killing, he narrated the circumstances 
substantially as the reader already knows them. 
He accompanied Miss Hawkins to New York at 
her request, supposing she was coming in relation to 
a bill then pending in Congress, to secure the atten- 
dance of absent members. Her note to him was here 
shown. She appeared to be very much excited at 
the Washington station. After she had asked the 
conductor several questions, he heard her say, ‘“‘He 
can’t escape.’’ Witness asked her ‘‘Who?” and 
she replied ‘‘Nobody.”’ Did not see her during the 
night. They traveled in a sleeping-car. In the 
morning she appeared not to have slept, said she 
had a headache. In crossing the ferry she asked 
him about the shipping in sight; he pointed out 
where the Cunarders lay when in port. They took 
a cup of coffee that morning at a restaurant. She 
said she was anxious to reach the Southern Hotel 
where Mr. Simons, one of the absent members, was 
233 


MARK TWAIN 


staying, before he went out. She was entirely self- 
possessed, and beyond unusual excitement did not 
act unnaturally. After she had fired twice at Colonel 
Selby, she turned the pistol toward her own breast, 
and witness snatched it from her. She had been a 
great deal with Selby in Washington, appeared to 
be infatuated with him. 

(Cross-examined by Mr. Braham.) ‘‘Mist-er... 
er Brierly!’ (Mr. Braham had in perfection this 
lawyer’s trick of annoying a witness, by drawling 
out the ‘‘Mister,’”’ as if unable to recall the name, 
until the witness is sufficiently aggravated, and then 
suddenly, with a rising inflection, flinging his name 
at him with startling unexpectedness.) ‘‘Mist-er... 
er Brierly! What is your occupation?” 

‘“‘Civil engineer, sir.” 

‘‘Ah, civil engineer [with a glance at the jury]. 
Following that occupation with Miss Hawkins?” 
(Smiles by the jury.) 

‘‘No, sir,” said Harry, reddening. 

‘“How long have you known the prisoner ?”’ 

“Two years, sir. I made her acquaintance in 
Hawkeye, Missouri.” 

‘"M...m...m. Mist-er...er Brierly! Were 
you not a lover of Miss Hawkins?” 

Objected to. ‘‘I submit, your Honor, that I have 
the right to establish the relation of this unwilling 
witness to the prisoner.’”’ Admitted. 

‘Well, sir,” said Harry hesitatingly, “‘we were 
friends.”’ 

“You act like a friend!’ (sarcastically.) The 
jury were beginning to hate this neatly dressed 

234 


THE GILDED AGE 


young sprig. ‘‘Mist-er ...er Brierly! Didn't 
Miss Hawkins refuse you?”’ 

Harry blushed and stammered and looked at the 
judge. ‘‘You must answer, sir,’ said his Honor. 

“She—she—didn’t accept me.” 

“‘No. I should think not. Brierly! do you dare 
tell the jury that you had not an interest in the 
removal of your rival, Colonel Selby?’’ roared Mr. 
Braham in a voice of thunder. 

“Nothing like this, sir, nothing like this,’ pro- 
tested the witness. 

‘“That’s all, sir,’’ said Mr. Braham severely. 

‘One word,’ said the district attorney. ‘‘Had 
you the least suspicion of the prisoner’s intention, 
up to the moment of the shooting?”’ 

“‘Not the least,’’ answered Harry earnestly. 

“Of course not, of course not,’’ nodded Mr. 
Braham to the jury. 

The prosecution then put upon the stand the 
other witnesses of the shooting at the hotel, and the 
clerk and the attending physicians. The fact of the 
homicide was clearly established. Nothing new was 
elicited, except from the clerk, in reply to a question 
by Mr. Braham, the fact that when the prisoner 
inquired for Colonel Selby she appeared excited and 
there was a wild look in her eyes. 

The dying deposition of Colonel Selby was then 
produced. It set forth Laura’s threats, but there 
was a significant addition to it, which the news- 
paper report did not have. It seemed that after 
the deposition was taken as reported, the Colonel 
was told for the first time by his physicians that his 

235 


MARK TWAIN 


wounds were mortal. He appeared to be in great 
mental agony and fear, and said he had not finished 
his deposition. He added, with great difficulty and 
long pauses, these words: ‘“‘I—have—not—told— 
all. I must tell—put—it—down—I—wronged— 
her. Years—ago—I—can’t—see—O—God—I—de- 
served—”’ That was all. He fainted and did not 
revive again. 

The Washington railway conductor testified that 
the prisoner had asked him if a gentleman and his 
family went out on the evening train, describing 
the persons he had since learned were Colonel Selby 
and family. 

Susan Cullum, colored servant at Senator Dil- 
worthy’s, was sworn. Knew Colonel Selby. Had 
seen him come to the house often, and be alone in 
the parlor with Miss Hawkins. He came the day 
but one before he was shot. She let him in. He 
appeared flustered like. She heard talking in the 
parlor, ’peared like it was quarrelin’. Was afeared 
sumfin’ was wrong. Just put her ear to the keyhole 
of the back parlor door. Heard a man’s voice, ‘‘I 
can’t, I can’t, good God,” quite beggin’ like. 
Heard young Miss’s voice, ‘“Take your choice, then. 
If you *bandon me, you knows what to ’spect.” 
Then he rushes outen the house. I goes in and 
I says, ‘‘Missis, did you ring?’ She was a-stand- 
in’, like a tiger, her eyes flashin’. I come right 
out. 

This was the substance of Susan’s testimony, 
which was not shaken in the least by a severe cross- 
examination. In reply to Mr. Braham’s question, 

236 


THE GILDED AGE 


if the prisoner did not look insane, Susan said, 
“Lord, no, sir, just mad as a hawnet.”’ 

Washington Hawkins was sworn. The pistol, 
identified by the officer as the one used in the homi- 
cide, was produced. Washington admitted that it 
was his. She had asked him for it one morning, 
saying she thought she had heard burglars the night 
before. Admitted that he never had heard burglars 
in the house. Had anything unusual happened just 
before that? Nothing that he remembered. Did 
he accompany her to a reception at Mrs. Schoon- 
maker’s a day or two before? Yes. What occurred? 
Little by little it was dragged out of the witness that 
Laura had behaved strangely there, appeared to be 
sick, and he had taken her home. Upon being 
pushed he admitted that she had afterward con- 
fessed that she saw Selby there. And Washington 
volunteered the statement that Selby was a black- 
hearted villain. 

The district attorney said, with some annoyance, 
““There—there! That will do.” 

The defense declined to examine Mr. Hawkins 
at present. The case for the prosecution was closed. 
Of the murder there could not be the least doubt, 
or that the prisoner followed the deceased to New 
York with a murderous intent. On the evidence 
the jury must convict, and might do so without 
leaving their seats. This was the condition of the 
case two days after the jury had been selected. A 
week had passed since the trial opened, and a Sun- 
day had intervened. The public who read the 
reports of the evidence saw no chance for the pris- 

237 


MARK TWAIN 


oner’s escape. ‘The crowd of spectators who had 
watched the trial were moved with the most profound 
sympathy for Laura. 

Mr. Braham opened the case for the defense. 
His manner was subdued, and he spoke in so low 
a voice that it was only by reason of perfect silence 
in the courtroom that he could be heard. He 
spoke very distinctly, however, and if his nation- 
ality could be discovered in his speech it was only 
in a certain richness and breadth of tone. 

He began by saying that he trembled at the 
responsibility he had undertaken; and he should 
altogether despair, if he did not see before him a 
jury of twelve men of rare intelligence, whose acute 
minds would unravel all the sophistries of the 
prosecution, men with a sense of honor, which would 
revolt at the remorseless persecution of this hunted 
woman by the state, men with hearts to feel for 
the wrongs of which she was the victim. Far be 
it from him to cast any suspicion upon the motives 
of the able, eloquent, and ingenious lawyers of the 
state; they act officially; their business is to con- 
vict. It is our business, gentlemen, to see that 
justice is done. 

‘It is my duty, gentlemen, to unfold to you one 
of the most affecting dramas in all the history of 
misfortune. I shall have to show you a life, the 
sport of fate and circumstances, hurried along 
through shifting storm and sun, bright with trusting 
innocence and anon black with heartless villainy, a 
career which moves on in love and desertion and 
anguish, always hovered over by the dark specter of 

238 


THE GILDED AGE 


INSANITY—an insanity hereditary and induced by 
mental torture—until it ends, if end it must in your 
verdict, by one of those fearful accidents which are 
inscrutable to men and of which God alone knows 
the secret. 

‘““Gentlemen, I shall ask you to go with me away 
from this courtroom and its minions of the law, 
away from the scene of this tragedy, to a distant, I 
wish I could say a happier, day. The story I have 
to tell is of a lovely little girl, with sunny hair and 
laughing eyes, traveling with her parents, evidently 
people of wealth and refinement, upon a Mississippi 
steamboat. There is an explosion, one of those 
terrible catastrophes which leave the imprint of an 
unsettled mind upon the survivors. Hundreds of 
mangled remains are sent into eternity. When the 
wreck is cleared away this sweet little girl is found 
among the panic-stricken survivors, in the midst of 
a scene of horror enough to turn the steadiest brain. 
Her parents have disappeared. Search even for 
their bodies is in vain. The bewildered, stricken 
child—who can say what changes the fearful event 
wrought in her tender brain?—clings to the first 
person who shows her sympathy. It is Mrs. Haw- 
kins, this good lady who is still her loving friend. 
Laura is adopted into the Hawkins family. Per- 
haps she forgets in time that she is not their child. 
She isan orphan. No, gentlemen, I will not deceive 
you, she is mot an orphan. Worse than that. There 
comes another day of agony. She knows that her 
father lives. But who is he, where is he? Alas, I 
cannot tell you. Through the scenes of this painful 

239 


MARK TWAIN 


history he flits here and there, a lunatic! If he 
seeks his daughter, it is the purposeless search of a 
lunatic, as one who wanders bereft of reason, crying, 
Where is my child? Laura seeks her father. In 
vain! Just as she is about to find him, again and 
again he disappears, he is gone, he vanishes. 

‘‘But this is only the prologue to the tragedy. 
Bear with me while I relate it. [Mr. Braham takes 
out his handkerchief, unfolds it slowly, crushes it in 
his nervous hand, and throws it on the table.] 
Laura grew up in her humble Southern home, a 
beautiful creature, the joy of the house, the pride of 
the neighborhood, the loveliest flower in all the sunny 
South. She might yet have been happy; she was 
happy. But the destroyer came into this paradise. 
He plucked the sweetest bud that grew there, and 
having enjoyed its odor, trampled it in the mire be- 
neath his feet. George Selby, the deceased, a hand- 
some, accomplished Confederate Colonel, was this 
human fiend. He deceived her with a mock mar- 
riage; after some months he brutally abandoned 
her, and spurned her as if she were a contemptible 
thing; all the time he had a wife in New Orleans. 
Laura was crushed. For weeks, as I shall show you 
by the testimony of her adopted mother and brother, 
she hovered over death in delirium. Gentlemen, 
did she ever emerge from this delirium? I shall 
show you that when she recovered her health, her 
mind was changed, she was not what she had been. 
You can judge yourselves whether the tottering 
reason ever recovered its throne. 

“Years pass. She is in Washington, apparently 

240 


THE GILDED AGE 


the happy favorite of a brilliant society. Her family 
have become enormously rich by one of those sud- 
den turns in fortune that the inhabitants of America 
are familiar with—the discovery of immense mineral 
wealth in some wild lands owned by them. She is 
engaged in a vast philanthropic scheme for the 
benefit of the poor, by the use of this wealth. But, 
alas, even here and now, the same relentless fate 
pursued her. The villain Selby appears again upon 
the scene, as if on purpose to complete the ruin of 
her life. He appeared to taunt her with her dis- 
honor, he threatened exposure if she did not become 
again the mistress of his passion. Gentlemen, do 
you wonder if this woman, thus pursued, lost her 
reason, was beside herself with fear, and that her 
wrongs preyed upon her mind until she was no 
longer responsible for her acts? I turn away my 
head as one who would not willingly look even upon 
the just vengeance of Heaven. [Mr. Braham paused 
as if overcome by his emotions. Mrs. Hawkins and 
Washington were in tears, as were many of the spec- 
tators also. The jury looked scared.] 

‘‘Gentlemen, in this condition of affairs it needed 
but a spark—I do not say a suggestion, I do not 
say a hint—from this butterfly Brierly, this rejected 
rival, to cause the explosion. I make no charges, 
but if this woman was in her right mind when she fled 
from Washington and reached this city in company 
with Brierly, then I do not know what insanity 1s.” 

When Mr. Braham sat down, he felt that he had 
the jury with him. A burst of applause followed, 
which the officer promptly suppressed. Laura, with 

241 


MARK TWAIN 


tears in her eyes, turned a grateful look upon her 
counsel. All the women among the spectators saw 
the tears and wept also. They thought as they also 
looked at Mr. Braham, How handsome he is! 

Mrs. Hawkins took the stand. She was somewhat 
confused to be the target of so many eyes, but her 
honest and good face at once told in Laura’s 
favor. 

“‘Mrs. Hawkins,” said Mr. Braham, “‘will you 
be kind enough to state the circumstances of your 
finding Laura?” 

“I object,” said Mr. McFlinn, rising to his feet. 
“This has nothing whatever to do with the case, 
your Honor. I am surprised at it, even after the 
extraordinary speech of my learned friend.” 

‘How do you propose to connect it, Mr. Braham?” 
asked the judge. 

“If it please the court,” said Mr. Braham, rising 
impressively, ‘“your Honor has permitted the prose- 
cution, and I have submitted without a word, to go 
into the most extraordinary testimony to establish a 
motive. Are we to be shut out from showing that 
the motive attributed to us could not by reason of 
certain mental conditions exist? I purpose, may it 
please your Honor, to show the cause and the origin 
of an aberration of mind, to follow it up with other 
like evidence, connecting it with the very moment of 
the homicide, showing a condition of the intellect of 
the prisoner that precludes responsibility.” 

‘“‘The state must insist upon its objections,’’ said 
the district attorney. ‘‘The purpose evidently is 
to open the door to a mass of irrelevant testimony, 

242 


THE GILDED AGE 


the object of which is to produce an effect upon the 
jury your Honor well understands.” 

‘““Perhaps,’”’ suggested the judge, ‘‘the court 
ought to hear the testimony, and exclude it after- 
ward, if it is irrelevant.”’ 

“Will your Honor hear argument on that?” 

“‘Certainly.”’ 

And argument his Honor did hear, or pretend to, 
for two whole days, from all the counsel in turn, in 
the course of which the lawyers read contradictory 
decisions enough to perfectly establish both sides, 
from volume after volume, whole libraries, in fact, 
until no mortal man could say what the rules were. 
The question of insanity in all its legal aspects was, 
of course, drawn into the discussion, and its appli- 
cation affirmed and denied. The case was felt to 
turn upon the admission or rejection of this evi- 
dence. It was a sort of test trial of strength between 
the lawyers. At the end the judge decided to admit 
the testimony, as the judge usually does in such 
cases, after a sufficient waste of time in what are 
called arguments. 

Mrs. Hawkins was allowed to go on. 


CHAPTER XXV 


PROGRESS OF THE TRIAL 


—Voyre mais (demandoit Trinquamelle) mon amy, comment 
procedez vous en action criminelle, la partie coupable prinse 
flagrante crimine?—Comme vous aultres Messieurs (respondit 
Bridoye)— 


“Hag eunn dra-bennag hoc’h efiz-hu da lavaroud évid hé 
wennidigez?”’ 


RS. HAWKINS, slowly and conscientiously, as 

if every detail of her family history was im- 
portant, told the story of the steamboat explosion, 
of the finding and adoption of Laura. Silas, that 
is Mr. Hawkins, and she always loved Laura as if 
she had been their own child. 

She then narrated the circumstances of Laura’s 
supposed marriage, her abandonment and long ill- 
ness, in a manner that touched all hearts. Laura 
had been a different woman since then. 

Cross-examined. At the time of first finding 
Laura on the steamboat, did she notice that Laura’s 
mind was at all deranged? She couldn’t say that 
she did. After the recovery of Laura from her long 
illness, did Mrs. Hawkins think there were any signs 
of insanity about her? Witness confessed that she 
did not think of it then. 

Re-direct examination. ‘‘But she was different 
after that?” 

244 


THE GILDED AGE 


‘Oh, yes, sir.”’ 

Washington Hawkins corroborated his mother’s 
testimony as to Laura’s connection with Colonel 
Selby. He was at Harding during the time of her 
living there with him. After Colonel Selby’s deser- 
tion she was almost dead, never appeared to know 
anything rightly for weeks. He added that he 
never saw such a scoundrel as Selby. (Checked 
by district attorney.) Had he noticed any change 
in Laura after her illness? Oh, yes. Whenever 
any allusion was made that might recall Selby to 
mind, she looked awful—as if she could kill 
him. 

‘*You mean,’’ said Mr. Braham, ‘‘that there was 
an unnatural, insane gleam in her eyes?’’ 

‘“Yes, certainly,’ said Washington in confusion. 

All this was objected to by the district attorney, 
but it was got before the jury, and Mr. Braham did 
not care how much it was ruled out after that. 

Beriah Sellers was the next witness called. The 
Colonel made his way to the stand with majestic, yet 
bland deliberation. Having taken the oath and kissed 
the Bible with a smack intended to show his great re- 
spect for that book, he bowed to his Honor with dig- 
nity, to the jury with familiarity, and then turned to 
the lawyers and stood in an attitude of superior 
attention. 

‘‘Mr. Sellers, I believe?’’ began Mr. Braham. 

‘‘Beriah Sellers, Missouri,’ was the courteous 
acknowledgment that the lawyer was correct. 

‘Mr. Sellers, you know the parties here, you are 
a friend of the family?” 

245 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Know them all, from infancy, sir. It was me, 
sir, that induced Silas Hawkins, Judge Hawkins, to 
come to Missouri, and make his fortune. It was by 
my advice and in company with me, sir, that he 
went into the operation of—”’ 

“Yes, yes. Mr. Sellers, did you know a Major 
Lackland ?”’ 

**Knew him well, sir, knew him and honored him, 
sir. He was one of the most remarkable men of 
our country, sir. A member of Congress. He was 
often at my mansion, sir, for weeks. He used to 
say to me, ‘Colonel Sellers, if you would go into 
politics, if I had you for a colleague, we should 
show Calhoun and Webster that the brain of the 
country didn’t lie east of the Alleghanies.” But I 
said—” 

*"Yes, yes. I believe Major Lackland is not liv- 
ing, Colonel?”’ 

There was an almost imperceptible sense of pleas- 
ure betrayed in the Colonel’s face at this prompt 
acknowledgment of his title. 

*‘Bless you, no. Died years ago, a miserable 
death, sir, a ruined man, a poor sot. He was sus- 
pected of selling his vote in Congress, and probably 
he did; the disgrace killed him, he was an outcast, 
sir, loathed by himself and by his constituents. 
And I think, sir—’’ 

The Judge. ‘‘You will confine yourself, Colonel 
Sellers, to the questions of the counsel.” 

‘‘Of course, your Honor. This,” continued the 
Colonel in confidential explanation, ‘‘was twenty 
years ago. I shouldn’t have thought of referring 

246° 


THE GILDED AGE 


to such a trifling circumstance now. If I remember 
rightly, sir—”’ 

A bundle of letters was here handed to the wit- 
ness. 

““Do you recognize that handwriting?”’ 

“As if it was my own, sir. It’s Major Lack- 
land’s. JI was knowing to these letters when Judge 
Hawkins received them. [The Colonel’s memory 
was a little at fault here. Mr. Hawkins had never 
gone into details with him on this subject.] He 
used to show them to me, and say, ‘Colonel Sellers, 
you've a mind to untangle this sort of thing.’ Lord, 
how everything comes back to me! Laura was a 
little thing then. The Judge and I were just laying 
our plans to buy the Pilot Knob, and—”’ 

“Colonel, one moment. Your Honor, we put 
these letters in evidence.” 

The letters were a portion of the correspondence 
of Major Lackland with Silas Hawkins; parts of 
them were missing and important letters were re- 
ferred to that were not here. They related, as the 
reader knows, to Laura’s father. Lackland had 
come upon the track of a man who was searching for 
a lost child in a Mississippi steamboat explosion 
years before. The man was lame in one leg, and 
appeared to be flitting from place to place. It 
seemed that Major Lackland got so close track of 
him that he was able to describe his personal appear- 
ance and learn his name. But the letter containing 
these particulars was lost. Once he heard of him 
at a hotel in Washington; but the man departed, 
leaving an empty trunk, the day before the major 

247 


MARK TWAIN 


went there. There was something very mysterious 
in all his movements. 

Colonel Sellers, continuing his testimony, said that 
he saw this lost letter, but could not now recall the 
name. Search for the supposed father had been 
continued by Lackland, Hawkins, and himself for 
several years, but Laura was not informed of it till 
after the death of Hawkins, for fear of raising false 
hopes in her mind. 

Here the district attorney arose and said: 

‘Your Honor, I must positively object to letting 
the witness wander off into all these irrelevant 
details.”’ 

Mr. Braham. “I submit, your Honor, that we 
cannot be interrupted in this manner. We have 
suffered the state to have full swing. Now here is 
a witness, who has known the prisoner from infancy, 
and is competent to testify upon the one point vital 
to her safety. Evidently, he is a gentleman of 
character, and his knowledge of the case cannot be 
shut out without increasing the aspect of persecu- 
tion which the state’s attitude toward the prisoner 
already has assumed.”’ 

The wrangle continued, waxing hotter and hotter. 
The Colonel, seeing the attention of the counsel 
and court entirely withdrawn from him, thought he 
perceived here his opportunity. Turning and beam- 
ing upon the jury, he began simply to talk, but as 
the grandeur of his position grew upon him his 
talk broadened unconsciously into an oratorial vein. 

““You see how she was situated, gentlemen: poor 
child, it might have broken her heart to let her mind 

248 


THE GILDED AGE 


get to running on such a thing as that. You see, 
from what we could make out her father was lame 
in the left leg and had a deep scar on his left fore- 
head. And so ever since the day she found out she 
had another father, she never could run across a lame 
stranger without being taken all over with a shiver, 
and almost fainting where she stood. And the next 
minute she would go right after that man. Once 
she stumbled on a stranger with a game leg, and 
she was the most grateful thing in this world—but it 
was the wrong leg, and it was days and days before 
she could leave her bed. Once she found a man 
with a scar on his forehead, and she was just going 
to throw herself into his arms, but he stepped out 
just then, and there wasn’t anything the matter with 
his legs. Time and time again, gentlemen of the 
jury, has this poor suffering orphan flung herself on 
her knees with all her heart’s gratitude in her eyes 
before some scarred and crippled veteran, but 
always, always to be disappointed, always to be 
plunged into new despair—if his legs were right 
his scar was wrong, if his scar was right his legs were 
wrong. Never could find a man that would fill the 
bill. Gentlemen of the jury, you have hearts, you 
have feelings, you have warm human sympathies, 
you can feel for this poor suffering child. Gentle- 
men of the jury, if I had time, if I had the oppor- 
tunity, if I might be permitted to go on and tell you 
the thousands and thousands and thousands of 
mutilated strangers this poor girl has started out of 
cover, and hunted from city to city, from state to 
state, from continent to continent, till she has run 
249 


MARK TWAIN 


them down and found they wa’n’t the ones, I know 
your hearts—” 

By this time the Colonel had become so warmed up, 
that his voice had reached a pitch above that of the 
contending counsel; the lawyers suddenly stopped, 
and they and the judge turned toward the Colonel 
and remained for several seconds too surprised at 
this novel exhibition to speak. In this interval of 
silence, an appreciation of the situation gradually 
stole over the audience, and an explosion of laughter 
followed, in which even the court and the bar could 
hardly keep from joining. 

Sheriff. ‘‘Order in the court.”’ 

The Judge. ‘‘The witness will confine his re- 
marks to answers to questions.”’ 

The Colonel turned courteously to the judge and 
said: 

‘‘Certainly, your Honor, certainly. I am not well 
acquainted with the forms of procedure in the courts 
of New York, but in the West, sir, in the West—”’ 

The Judge. ‘‘There, there, that will do, that 
will do!” 

‘You see, your Honor, there were no questions 
asked me, and I thought I would take advantage of 
the lull in the proceedings to explain to the jury a 
very significant train of—’”’ 

The Judge. ‘‘That will do, sir! Proceed, Mr. 
Braham.” 

‘Colonel Sellers, have you any reason to suppose 
that this man is still living?” 

‘‘Every reason, sir, every reason.” 

“State why.” 

250 


THE GILDED AGE 


“I have never heard of his death, sir. It has 
never come to my knowledge. In fact, sir, as I 
once said to Governor—”’ 

“Will you state to the jury what has been the 
effect of the knowledge of this wandering and evi- 
dently unsettled being, supposed to be her father, 
upon the mind of Miss Hawkins for so many years?” 

Question objected to. Question ruled out. 

Cross-examined. ‘‘Major Sellers, what is your 
occupation ?”’ 

The Colonel looked about him loftily, as if casting 
in his mind what would be the proper occupation of 
a person of such multifarious interests, and then 
said with dignity: 

‘‘A gentleman, sir. My father used to always 
say, sir—’’ 

‘“‘Captain Sellers, did you ever see this man, this 
supposed father ?”’ 

‘‘No, sir. But upon one occasion, old Senator 
Thompson said to me, ‘It’s my opinion, Colonel 
Sellers—’”’ 

‘‘Did you ever see anybody who had seen him?” 

‘‘No, sir. It was reported around at one time, 
that—”’ 

‘That is all.” 

The defense then spent a day in the examination 
of medical experts in insanity, who testified, on the 
evidence heard, that sufficient causes had occurred 
to produce an insane mind in the prisoner. Numer- 
ous cases were cited to sustain this opinion. There 
was such a thing as momentary insanity, in which 
the person, otherwise rational to all appearances, 

251 


MARK TWAIN 


was for the time actually bereft of reason, and not 
responsible for his acts. The causes of this momen- 
tary possession could often be found in the person’s 
life. [It afterward came out that the chief expert 
for the defense was paid a thousand dollars for 
looking into the case.] 

The prosecution consumed another day in the 
examination of experts refuting the notion of in- 
sanity. These causes might have produced insanity, 
but there was no evidence that they have produced 
it in this case, or that the prisoner was not at the 
time of the commission of the crime in full possession 
of her ordinary faculties. 

The trial had now lasted two weeks. It required 
four days now for the lawyers to “‘sum up.’’ These 
arguments of the counsel were very important 
to their friends, and greatly enhanced their reputa- 
tion at the bar; but they have small interest to us. 
Mr. Braham, in his closing speech, surpassed him- 
self; his effort is still remembered as the greatest in 
the criminal annals of New York. . 

Mr. Braham re-drew for the jury the picture of 
Laura’s early life; he dwelt long upon that painful 
episode of the pretended marriage and the desertion. 
Colonel Selby, he said, belonged, gentlemen, to 
what is called the ‘‘upper classes.” It is the privi- 
lege of the ‘‘upper classes”’ to prey upon the sons 
and daughters of the people. The Hawkins family, 
though allied to the best blood of the South, were 
at the time in humble circumstances. He com- 
mented upon her parentage. Perhaps her agonized 
father, in his intervals of sanity, was still searching 

252 


THE GILDED AGE 


for his lost daughter. Would he one day hear that 
she had died a felon’s death? Society had pursued 
her, fate had pursued her, and in a moment of 
delirium she had turned and defied fate and society. 
He dwelt upon the admission of base wrong in 
Colonel Selby’s dying statement. He drew a vivid 
picture of the villain at last overtaken by the ven- 
geance of Heaven. Would the jury say that this 
retributive justice, inflicted by an outraged, a deluded 
woman, rendered irrational by the most cruel wrongs, 
was in the nature of a foul, premeditated murder? 
‘““Gentlemen, it is enough for me to look upon the 
life of this most beautiful and accomplished of her 
sex, blasted by the heartless villainy of man, without 
seeing, at the end of it, the horrible spectacle of a 
gibbet. Gentlemen, we are all human, we have all 
sinned, we all have need of mercy. But I do not ask 
mercy of you who are the guardians of society and 
of the poor waifs, its sometimes wronged victims; I 
ask only that justice which you and I shall need in 
that last dreadful hour, when death will be robbed of 
half its terrors if we can reflect that we have never 
wronged a human being. Gentlemen, the life of 
this lovely and once happy girl, this now stricken 
woman, is in your hands.” 

The jury were visibly affected. Half the court- 
room was in tears. Ifa vote of both spectators and 
jury could have been taken then, the verdict would 
have been, ‘‘Let her go, she has suffered enough.” 

But the district attorney had the closing argu- 
ment. Calmly and without malice or excitement he 
reviewed the testimony. As the cold facts were 

253 


MARK TWAIN 


unrolled, fear settled upon the listeners. There was 
no escape from the murder or its premeditation. 
Laura’s character as a lobbyist in Washington, which 
had been made to appear incidentally in the evi- 
dence, was also against her. The whole body of 
the testimony of the defense was shown to be irrele- 
vant, introduced only to excite sympathy, and not 
giving a color of probability to the absurd supposi- 
tion of insanity. The attorney then dwelt upon the 
insecurity of life in the city, and the growing im- 
munity with which women committed murders. Mr. 
McFlinn made a very able speech, convincing the 
reason without touching the feelings. 

The judge in his charge reviewed the testimony 
with great show of impartiality. He ended by say- 
ing that the verdict must be acquittal or murder in 
the first degree. If you find that the prisoner com- 
mitted a homicide, in possession of her reason and 
with premeditation, your verdict will be accordingly. 
If you find she was not in her right mind, that she 
was the victim of insanity, hereditary or momentary, 
as it has been explained, your verdict will take that 
into account. 

As the judge finished his charge, the spectators 
anxiously watched the faces of the jury. It was not 
a remunerative study. In the courtroom the gen- 
eral feeling was in favor of Laura, but whether this 
feeling extended to the jury, their stolid faces did 
not reveal. The public outside hoped for a convic- 
tion, as it always does; it wanted an example; the 
newspapers trusted the jury would have the courage 
to do its duty. When Laura was convicted, then 

254 


THE GILDED AGE 


the public would turn around and abuse the governor 
if he did not pardon her. 

The jury went out. Mr. Braham preserved his 
serene confidence, but Laura’s friends were dis- 
spirited. Washington and Colonel Sellers had been 
obliged to go to Washington, and they had departed 
under the unspoken fear that the verdict would be 
unfavorable—a disagreement was the best they 
could hope for, and money was needed. The 
necessity of the passage of the University bill was 
now imperative. 

The court waited for some time, but the jury gave 
no signs of coming in. Mr. Braham said it was 
extraordinary. The court then took a recess for a 
couple of hours. Upon again coming in, word was 
brought that the jury had not yet agreed. 

But the jury had a question. The point upon 
which they wanted instruction was this: They 
‘wanted to know if Colonel Sellers was related to the 
Hawkins family. The court then adjourned till 
morning. 

Mr. Braham, who was in something of a pet, re- 
marked to Mr. O’Keefe that they must have been 
deceived—that juryman with the broken nose could 
read! 


CHAPTER XXVI 
WAITING FOR TELEGRAMS 


“Wegotogwen ga-ijiwebadogwen; gonima ta-matchi-inakam- 
igad.”’ 


HE momentous day was at hand—a day that 

promised to make or mar the fortunes of the 
Hawkins family for all time. Washington Hawkins 
and Colonel Sellers were both up early, for neither 
of them could sleep. Congress was expiring, and 
was passing bill after bill as if they were gasps and 
each likely to be its last. The University was on file 
for its third reading this day, and to-morrow Wash- 
ington would be a millionaire and Sellers no longer 
impecunious; but this day, also, or at farthest the 
next, the jury in Laura’s case would come to a de- 
cision of some kind or other—they would find her 
guilty, Washington secretly feared, and then the 
care and the trouble would all come back again and 
there would be wearing months of besieging judges 
for new trials; on this day, also, the re-election of 
Mr. Dilworthy to the Senate would take place. So 
Washington’s mind was in a state of turmoil; there 
were more interests at stake than it could handle 
with serenity. He exulted when he thought of his 
millions; he was filled with dread when he thought 

256 


THE GILDED AGE 


of Laura. But Sellers was excited and happy. He 
said: 

“Everything is going right, everything’s going 
perfectly right. Pretty soon the telegrams will 
begin to rattle in, and then you'll see, my boy. Let 
the jury do what they please; what difference is it 
going to make? To-morrow we can send a million 
to New York and set the lawyers at work on the 
judges; bless your heart, they will go before judge 
after judge and exhort and beseech and pray and 
shed tears. They always do; and they always win, 
too. And they will win this time. They will get a 
writ of habeas corpus, and a stay of proceedings, and 
a supersedeas, and a new trial, and a nolle prosequi, 
and there you are! That’s the routine, and it’s no 
trick at all to a New York lawyer. That’s the 
regular routine—everything’s red tape and routine 
in the law, you see; it’s all Greek to you, of course, 
but to a man who is acquainted with those things 
it’s mere—I’ll explain it to you some time. Every- 
thing’s going to glide right along easy and comfort- 
able now. You'll see, Washington, you'll see how 
it will be. And then, let me think. . . . Dilworthy 
will be elected to-day, and by day after to-morrow 
night he will be in New York ready to put in hts 
shovel—and you haven’t lived in Washington all 
this time not to know that the people who walk 
right by a Senator whose term is up without hardly 
seeing him will be down at the deepo to say ‘Wel- 
come back and God bless you, Senator, I’m glad to 
see you, sir!’ when he comes along back re-elected, 
you know. Well, you see, his influence was natu- 

257 


MARK TWAIN 


rally running low when he left here, but now he has 
got a new six years’ start, and his suggestions will 
- simply just weigh a couple of tons apiece day after 
to-morrow. Lord bless you, he could rattle through 
that habeas corpus and supersedeas and all those 
things for Laura all by himself if he wanted to, 
when he gets back.” 

“TI hadn’t thought of that,” said Washington, 
brightening, ‘“‘but itis so. A newly elected Senator 
1s a power, I know that.’’ 

“Yes, indeed, he is. Why it is just human nature. 
Look at me. When we first came here, I was Mr. 
Sellers, and Major Sellers, and Captain Sellers, but 
nobody could ever get it right, somehow; but the 
minute our bill went through the House, I was 
Colonel Sellers every time. And nobody could do 
enough for me; and whatever I said was wonderful, 
sir, it was always wonderful; I never seemed to say 
any flat things at all. It was Colonel, won’t you 
come and dine with us; and Colonel, why don’t 
we ever see you at our house; and the Colonel says 
this; and the Colonel says that; and we know such- 
and-such is so-and-so, because husband heard 
Colonel Sellers say so. Don’t you see? Well, the 
senate adjourned and left our bill high and dry, 
and Ill be hanged if I warn’t Old Sellers from that 
day till our bill passed the House again last week. 
Now I’m the Colonel again; andif I were to eat all the 
dinners I am invited to, I reckon I’d wear my teeth 
down level with my gums in a couple of weeks.” 

“Well, I do wonder what you will be to-morrow, 
Colonel, after the President signs the bill?” 

258 


THE GILDED AGE 


““General, sir!—General, without a doubt. Yes, 
sir, to-morrow it will be General, let me congratulate 
you, sir; General, you’ve done a great work, sir; 
—you've done a great work for the niggro; Gentle- 
men, allow me the honor to introduce my friend 
General Sellers, the humane friend of the niggro. 
Lord bless me, you’ll see the newspapers say, Gen- 
eral Sellers and servants arrived in the city last night 
and is stopping at the Fifth Avenue; and General 
Sellers has accepted a reception and banquet by the 
Cosmopolitan Club; you’ll see the General’s opin- 
ions quoted, too—and what the General has to say 
about the propriety of a new trial and a habeas 
corpus for the unfortunate Miss Hawkins will not 
be without weight in influential quarters, I can 
tell you.”’ 

‘‘And I want to be the first to shake your faithful 
old hand and salute you with your new honors, and 
I want to do it mow—General!”’ said Washington, 
suiting the action to the word, and accompanying 
it with all the meaning that a cordial grasp and 
eloquent eyes could give it. 

The Colonel was touched; he was pleased and 
proud, too; his face answered for that. 

Not very long after breakfast the telegrams be- 
gan to arrive. The first was from Braham, and ran 
thes: 

We feel certain that the verdict will be rendered to-day. Be 
it good or bad, let it find us ready to make the next move in- 
stantly, whatever it may be. 

“That’s the right talk,’ said Sellers. ‘‘That 
Braham’s a wonderful man. He was the only man 

259 


MARK TWAIN 


there that really understood me; he told me so 
himself afterward.’ 
The next telegram was from Mr. Dilworthy: 


I have not only brought over the Great Invincible, but 
through him a dozen more of the opposition. Shall be re-elected 
to-day by an overwhelming majority. 


“Good again!’’ said the Colonel. ‘‘That man’s 
talent for organization is something marvelous. He 
wanted me to go out there and engineer that thing, 
but I said, No, Dilworthy, I must be on hand here, 
both on Laura’s account and the bill’s—but you’ve 
no trifling genius for organization yourself, said I— 
and I was right. You go ahead, said I—you can 
fix it—and so he has. But [I claim no credit for 
that—if I stiffened up his backbone a little, I simply 
put him in the way to make his fight—didn’t make 
it myself. He has captured Noble—I consider that 
a splendid piece of diplomacy—splendid, sir!’’ 

By and by came another despatch from New York: 


Jury still out. Laura calm and firm as a statue. The 
report that the jury have brought her in guilty is false and 
premature. 


‘‘Premature!’ gasped Washington, turning white. 
‘‘Then they all expect that sort of a verdict, when 
it comes.”’ 

And so did he; but he had not had courage 
enough to put it into words. He had been prepar- 
ing himself for the worst, but after all his prepara- 
tion the bare suggestion of the possibility of such a 
verdict struck him cold as death. 

The friends grew impatient now; the telegrams 

260 


THE GILDED AGE 


did not come fast enough; even the lightning could 
not keep up with their anxieties. They walked the 
floor talking disjointedly and listening for the door- 
bell. Telegram after telegram came. Still no re- 
sult. By and by there was one which contained a 
single line: 


Court now coming in after brief recess to hear verdict. Jury 
ready. 


‘‘Oh, I wish they would finish!” said Washing- 
ton. ‘‘This suspense is killing me by inches!” 
Then came another telegram: 


Another hitch somewhere. Jury want a little more time and 
further instructions. 


“Well, well, well, this is trying,’’ said the Col- 
onel. And after a pause, ‘‘No despatch from Dil- 
worthy for two hours, now. Even a despatch from 
him would be better than nothing, just to vary this 
taane.”’ 

They waited twenty minutes. It seemed twenty 
hours. 

‘“Come!”” said Washington. ‘I can’t wait for 
the telegraph-boy to come all the way up here. 
Let’s go down to Newspaper Row—meet him on 
the way.”’ 

While they were passing along the avenue, they 
saw some one putting up a great display sheet on 
the bulletin-board of a newspaper-office, and an 
eager crowd of men was collecting about the place. 
Washington and the Colonel ran to the spot and 
read this: 

261 


MARK TWAIN 


Tremendous sensation! Startling news from Saint’s Rest! 
On first ballot for U.S. Senator, when voting was about to begin, 
Mr. Noble rose in his place and drew forth a package, walked 
forward and laid it on the Speaker’s desk, saying, “‘ This contains 
seven thousand dollars in bank bills and was given me by 
Senator Dilworthy in his bed-chamber at midnight last night 
to buy my vote for him—I wish the Speaker to count the 
money and retain it to pay the expense of prosecuting this 
infamous traitor for bribery.” The whole legislature was 
stricken speechless with dismay and astonishment. Noble 
further said that there were fifty members present with money 
in their pockets, placed there by Dilworthy to buy their votes. 
Amidst unparalleled excitement the ballot was now taken, and 
J. W. Smith elected U. S. Senator; Dilworthy receiving not one 
vote! Noble promises damaging exposures concerning Dilworthy 
and certain measures of his now pending in Congress. 

““Good heavens and earth!” exclaimed the Colonel. 

‘“To the Capitol!’ said Washington. “Fly!” 

And they did fly. Long before they got there 
the newsboys were running ahead of them with 
extras, hot from the press, announcing the astound- 
ing news. _ 

Arrived in the gallery of the Senate, the friends 
saw a curious spectacle—every Senator held an 
extra in his hand and looked as interested as if it 
contained news of the destruction of the earth. Not 
a single member was paying the least attention to 
the business of the hour. | 

The secretary, in a loud voice, was just beginning 
to read the title of a bill: 

‘“House- Bill-No.-4,231,-An - Act-to-Found-and- 
Incorporate-the-Knobs-Industrial-University !-Read- 
first -and-second -time—considered-in-committee-of- 
the- whole-ordered-engrossed-and - passed - to-third- 
reading-and-final-passage!”’ 


262 


THE GILDED AGE 


The President. ‘‘Third reading of the bill!”’ 

The two friends shook in their shoes. Senators 
threw down their extras and snatched a word or two 
with each other in whispers. Then the gavel rapped 
to command silence while the names were called on 
the ayes and nays. Washington grew paler and 
paler, weaker and weaker while the lagging list pro- 
gressed; and when it was finished, his head fell 
helplessly forward on his arms. The fight was 
fought, the long struggle was over, and he was a 
pauper. Not a man had voted for the bill! 

Colonel Sellers was bewildered and well - nigh 
paralyzed, himself. But no man could long con- 
sider his own troubles in the presence of such suf- 
fering as Washington’s. He got him up and sup- 
ported him—almost carried him, indeed—out of 
the building and into a carriage. All the way home 
Washington lay with his face against the Colonel’s 
shoulder and merely groaned and wept. The Col- 
onel tried as well as he could under the dreary cir- 
cumstances to hearten him a little, but it was of no 
use. Washington was past all hope of cheer now. 
He only said: 

‘Oh, it is all over—it is all over for good, Col- 
onel. We must beg our bread now. We never can 
get up again. It was our last chance, and it is gone. 
They will hang Laura! My God, they will hang 
her! Nothing can save the poor girl now. Oh, I 
wish with all my soul they would hang me instead!” 

Arrived at home, Washington fell into a chair and 
buried his face in his hands and gave full way to his 
misery. The Colonel did not know where to turn 

263 


MARK TWAIN 


nor what to do. The servant maid knocked at the 
door and passed in a telegram, saying it had come 
while they were gone. 

The Colonel tore it open and read with the voice 
of a man-of-war’s broadside: 

‘VERDICT OF JuRY, Not GuILTy, AND LAURA IS 
FREE!” 


CHAPTER XXVII 


THE VERDICT. LAURA ACQUITTED 


eX A A 
Papel y tinta y poco justicia. 


HE courtroom was packed on the morning on 

which the verdict of the jury was expected, as 
it had been every day of the trial, and by the same 
spectators, who had followed its progress with such 
intense interest. 

There is a delicious moment of excitement which 
the frequenter of trials well knows, and which he 
would not miss for the world. It is that instant 
when the foreman of the jury stands up to give the 
verdict, and before he has opened his fateful lips. 

The court assembled and waited. It was an ob- 
stinate jury. It even had another question—this 
intelligent jury—to ask the judge this morning. 

The question was this: ‘‘Were the doctors clear 
that the deceased had no disease which might soon 
have carried him off, if he had not been shot?” 
There was evidently one juryman who didn’t want 
to waste life, and was willing to strike a general 
average, as the jury always does in a civil case, de- 
ciding not according to the evidence but reaching 
the verdict by some occult mental process. 

265 


MARK TWAIN 


During the delay the spectators exhibited unex- 
ampled patience, finding amusement and relief in 
the slightest movements of the court, the prisoner, 
and the lawyers. Mr. Braham divided with Laura 
the attention of the house. Bets were made by the 
sheriff’s deputies on the verdict, with large odds in 
favor of a disagreement. 

It was afternoon when it was announced that the 
jury was comingin. The reporters took their places 
and were all attention; the judge and lawyers were 
in their seats; the crowd swayed and pushed in eager 
expectancy, as the jury walked in and stood up in 
silence. 

Judge. ‘‘Gentlemen, have you agreed upon your 
verdict ?”’ 

Foreman. ‘‘We have.” 

Judge. ‘‘What is it?” 

Foreman. ‘‘Not GUuItty.”’ 

A shout went up from the entire room anda 
tumult of cheering which the court in vain attempted 
to quell. For a few moments all order was lost. 
The spectators crowded within the bar and sur- 
rounded Laura, who, calmer than any one else, was 
supporting her aged mother, who had almost fainted 
from excess of joy. 

And now occurred one of those beautiful incidents 
which no fiction-writer would dare to imagine, a 
scene of touching pathos, creditable to our fallen 
humanity. In the eyes of the women of the audi- 
ence, Mr. Braham was the hero of the occasion; he 
had saved the life of the prisoner; and besides he 
was such a handsome man. The women could not 

266 


THE GILDED AGE 


restrain their long-pent-up emotions. They threw 
themselves upon Mr. Braham in a transport of 
gratitude; they kissed him again and again, the 
young as well as the advanced in years, the married 
as well as the ardent single women; they improved 
the opportunity with a touching self-sacrifice; in the 
words of a newspaper of the day they ‘“‘lavished 
him with kisses.’’ It was something sweet to do; 
and it would be sweet for a woman to remember 
in after years, that she had kissed Braham! Mr. 
Braham himself received these fond assaults with the 
gallantry of his nation, enduring the ugly, and 
heartily paying back beauty in its own coin. 

This beautiful scene is still known in New York 
as ‘“‘the kissing of Braham.” 

When the tumult of congratulation had a little 
spent itself, and order was restored, Judge O’Shaun- 
nessy said that it now became his duty to provide 
for the proper custody and treatment of the ac- 
quitted. The verdict of the jury having left no 
doubt that the woman was of an unsound mind, with 
a kind of insanity dangerous to the safety of the 
community, she could not be permitted to go at 
large. ‘‘In accordance with the directions of the 
law in such cases,” said the judge, ‘‘and in obedience 
to the dictates of a wise humanity, I hereby com- 
mit Laura Hawkins to the care of the Superintend- 
ent of the State Hospital for Insane Criminals, 
to be held in confinement until the State Commus- 
sioners on Insanity shall order her discharge. Mr. 
Sheriff, you will attend at once to the execution of 
this decree.”’ 

267 


MARK TWAIN 


Laura was overwhelmed and terror-stricken. She 
had expected to walk forth in freedom in a few mo- 
ments. The revulsion was terrible. Her mother 
appeared like one shaken with an ague fit. Laura 
insane! And about to be locked up with madmen! 
She had never contemplated this. Mr. Braham said 
he should move at once for a writ of habeas corpus. 

But the judge could not do less than his duty, the 
law must have its way. As in the stupor of a sud- 
den calamity, and not fully comprehending it, Mrs. 
Hawkins saw Laura led away by the officer. 

With little space for thought she was rapidly 
driven to the railway-station, and conveyed to the 
Hospital for Lunatic Criminals. It was only when 
she was within this vast and grim abode of madness 
that she realized the horror of her situation. It was 
only when she was received by the kind physician 
and read pity in his eyes, and saw his look of hope- 
less incredulity when she attempted to tell him that 
she was not insane; it was only when she passed 
through the ward to which she was consigned and 
saw the horrible creatures, the victims of a double 
calamity, whose dreadful faces she was hereafter to 
see daily, and was locked into the small, bare room 
that was to be her home, that all her fortitude for- 
sook her. She sank upon the bed, as socn as she 
was left alone—she had been searched by the matron 
—and tried to think. But her brain was in a whirl. 
She recalled Braham’s speech, she recalled the testi- 
mony regarding her lunacy. She wondered if she 
were not mad; she felt that she soon should be 
among these loathsome creatures. Better almost to 

268 


THE GILDED AGE 


have died, than to slowly go mad in this confine- 
ment. 

~——We beg the reader’s pardon. This is not his- 
tory which has just been written. It is really what 
would have occurred if this were a novel. If this 
were a work of fiction, we should not dare to dispose 
of Laura otherwise. ‘True art and any attention to 
dramatic properties required it. The novelist who 
would turn loose upon society an insane murderess 
could not escape condemnation. Besides, the safety 
of society, the decencies of criminal procedure, what 
we call our modern civilization, all would demand 
that Laura should be disposed of in the manner we 
have described. Foreigners, who read this sad 
story, will be unable to understand any other termi- 
nation of it. 

But this is history and not fiction. ‘There is no 
such law or custom as that to which his Honor is sup- 
posed to have referred; Judge O’Shaunnessy would 
not probably pay any attention to it if there were. 
There is no Hospital for Insane Criminals; there is 
no State Commission of Lunacy. What actually 
occurred when the tumult in the courtroom had 
subsided the sagacious reader will now learn. 

Laura left the courtroom, accompanied by her 
mother and other friends, amid the congratulations 
of those assembled, and was cheered as she entered 
a carriage, and drove away. How sweet was the 
sunlight, how exhilarating the sense of freedom! 
Were not these following cheers the expression of 
popular approval and affection? Was she not the 
heroine of the hour? 

269 


MARK TWAIN 


It was with a feeling of triumph that Laura reached 
her hotel, a scornful feeling of victory over society 
with its own weapons. 

Mrs. Hawkins shared not at all in this feeling; she 
was broken with the disgrace and the long anxiety. 

‘*Thank God, Laura,’ she said, ‘‘it is over. Now 
we will go away from this hateful city. Let us go 
home at once.” 

‘‘Mother,”’ replied Laura, speaking with some 
tenderness, “‘I cannot go with you. There, don’t 
cry, I cannot go back to that life.” 

Mrs. Hawkins was sobbing. ‘This was more cruel 
than anything else, for she had a dim notion of what 
it would be to leave Laura to herself. 

“‘No, mother, you have been everything to me. 
You know how dearly I love you. But I cannot go 
back.” 

A boy brought in a telegraphic despatch. Laura 
took it and read: 


The bill is lost. Dilworthy is ruined. (Signed) 
WASHINGTON. 


For a moment the words swam before her eyes. 
The next her eyes flashed fire as she handed the 
despatch to her mother and bitterly said: 

‘“The world is against me. Well, let it be, let it. 
IT am against it.”’ 

*‘This is a cruel disappointment,’’ said Mrs. Haw- 
kins, to whom one grief more or less did not much 
matter now, ‘‘to you and Washington; but we must 
humbly bear it.’ 

‘‘Bear it,’’ replied Laura scornfully, ‘‘I’ve all 

270 


THE GILDED AGE 


my life borne it, and fate has thwarted me at every 
step.” 

A servant came to the door to say that there was 
a gentleman below who wished to speak with Miss 
Hawkins. ‘‘J. Adolphe Griller’’ was the name 
Laura read on the card. “I do not know such a 
person. He probably comes from Washington. 
send him up.” 

Mr. Griller entered. He was a small man, slovenly 
in dress, his tone confidential, his manner wholly 
void of animation, all his features below the forehead 
protruding—particularly the apple of his throat— 
hair without a kink in it, a hand with no grip, a 
meek, hang-dog countenance. He was a falsehood 
done in flesh and blood; for while every visible sign 
about him proclaimed him a poor, witless, useless 
weakling, the truth was that he had the brains to 
plan great enterprises and the pluck to carry them 
through. That was his reputation, and it was a 
deserved one. 

He softly said: 

‘I called to see you on business, Miss Hawkins. 
You have my card?”’ 

Laura bowed. 

Mr. Griller continued to purr, as softly as before: 

‘“‘T will proceed to business. I am a business 
man. I am a lecture-agent, Miss Hawkins, and as 
soon as I saw that you were acquitted, it occurred 
to me that an early interview would be mutually 
beneficial.’’ 

“T don’t understand you, sir,’’ said Laura coldly. 

‘“‘No? You see, Miss Hawkins, this is your op- 

271 


MARK TWAIN 


portunity. If you will enter the lecture field under 
good auspices, you will carry everything before 
you.” 

‘But, sir, I never lectured, I haven't any lecture, 
I don’t know anything about it.”’ 

‘‘Ah, madam, that makes no difference—no real 
difference. It is not necessary to be able to lecture 
in order to go into the lecture field. If one’s name 
is celebrated all over the land, especially, and if she 
is also beautiful, she is certain to draw large audi- 
ences.’’ | 

‘But what should I lecture about?’’ asked Laura, 
beginning in spite of herself to be a little interested 
as well as amused. 

‘‘Oh, why, woman—something about woman, I 
should say; the marriage relation, woman’s fate, 
anything of that sort. Call it The Revelations of a 
Woman’s Life; now, there’s a good title. I wouldn’t 
want any better title than that. I’m prepared to 
make you an offer, Miss Hawkins, a liberal offer— 
twelve thousand dollars for thirty nights.” 

Laura thought. She hesitated. Why not? It 
would give her employment, money. She must do 
something. 

“T will think of it, and let you know soon. But 
still, there is very little likelihood that I—however, 
we will not discuss it further now.” 

‘‘Remember, that the sooner we get to work the 
better, Miss Hawkins, public curiosity is so fickle. 
Good day, madam.” 

The close of the trial released Mr. Harry Brierly 
and left him free to depart upon his long-talked-of 


272 


THE GILDED AGE 


Pacific coast mission. He was very mysterious about 
it, even to Philip. 

“It’s confidential, old boy,” he said, ‘‘a little 
scheme we have hatched up. I don’t mind telling 
you that it’s a good deal bigger thing than that 
in Missouri, and a sure thing. I wouldn’t take 
half a million just for my share. And it will 
open something for you, Phil. You will hear from 
me.”’ 

Philip did hear from Harry a few months after- 
ward. Everything promised splendidly, but there 
was a little delay. Could Phil let him have a hun- 
dred, say for ninety days? 

Philip himself hastened to Philadelphia, and, as 
soon as the spring opened, to the mine at Ilium, and 
began transforming the loan he had received from 
Squire Montague into laborers’ wages. He was 
haunted with many anxieties; in the first place, 
Ruth was overtaxing her strength in her hospital 
labors, and Philip felt as if he must move heaven 
and earth to save her from such toil and suffering. 
His increased pecuniary obligation oppressed him. 
It seemed to him also that he had been one cause of 
the misfortune to the Bolton family, and that he was 
dragging into loss and ruin everybody who asso- 
ciated with him. He worked on day after day and 
week after week, with a feverish anxiety. 

It would be wicked, thought Philip, and impious, 
to pray for luck; he felt that perhaps he ought not 
to ask a blessing upon the sort of labor that was 
only a venture; but yet in that daily petition, which 
this very faulty and not very consistent young 

273 


MARK TWAIN... 


Christian gentleman. put up, he prayed earnestly 
enough for Ruth and for the Boltons and for those 
whom he loved and who trusted in him, and that his 
life might not be a misfortune to them and a failure 
to himself. 

Since this young fellow went out into the world 
from his New England home, he had done some 
things that he would rather his mother should not 
know, things maybe that he would shrink from tell- 
ing Ruth. At a certain green age young gentlemen 
are sometimes afraid of being called milksops, and 
Philip’s associates had not always been the most 
select, such as these historians would have chosen 
for him, or whom at a later period he would have 
chosen for himself. It seemed. inexplicable, for 
instance, that his life should have been thrown 
so much with his college acquaintance, Henry Bri- 
erly. 

Yet, this was true of Philip, that in whatever com- 
pany he had been he had never been ashamed to 
stand up for the principles he learned from his 
mother, and neither. raillery nor looks of wonder 
turned him from that daily habit he learned at his 
mother’s knees. Even flippant Harry respected 
this, and perhaps it was one of the reasons why 
Harry and all who knew Philip trusted him im- 
plicitly. And yet it must be confessed that Philip 
did not convey the impression to the world of a very 
serious young man, or of a man who might not rather 
easily fall into temptation. One looking for a real 
hero would have to go elsewhere. 

The parting between Laura and her mother was 

274 


THE GILDED AGE 


exceedingly painful to both. It was as if two friends 
parted on a wide plain, the one to journey toward 
the setting and the other toward the rising sun, each 
comprehending that every step henceforth must 
separate their lives wider and wider. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


THE SENATE, JEALOUS OF ITS HONOR, REBUKES 
CORRUPTION 


Ebok imana ebok ofut idibi. 


‘O xapxivog wd’ epa 

Xad¢ rév dpw AaBwr 

EvOiy yon roy éraipoy, Euper, 
Kai py oxodtta gpovety. 


Mishittoonaeog noowaog 
ayeuuhkone neen, 

Nashpe nuskesukqunnonut 
ho, ho, nunnaumunun. 


HEN Mr. Noble’s bombshell fell in Senator 

Dilworthy’s camp, the statesman was discon- 
certed fora moment. For a moment; that was all. 
The next moment he was calmly up and doing. 
From the center of our country to its circumference, 
nothing was talked of but Mr. Noble’s terrible 
revelation, and the people were furious. Mind, 
they were not furious because bribery was uncom- 
mon in our public life, but merely because here was 
another case. Perhaps it did not occur to the nation 
of good and worthy people that while they continued 
to sit comfortably at home and leave the true source 
of our political power (the ‘‘primaries’’) in the 
hands of saloon-keepers, dog-fanciers, and hod- 
carriers, they could go on expecting ‘‘another’’ case 

276 


VE “GILDED * 2CE 


of this kind, and even dozens and hundreds of them, 
and never be disappointed. However, they may 
have thought that to sit at home and grumble would 
some day right the evil. 

Yes, the nation was excited, but Senator Dil- 
worthy was calm—what was left of him after the 
explosion of the shell. Calm, and up and doing. 
What did he do first? What would you do first, 
after you had tomahawked your mother at the 
breakfast-table for putting too much sugar in your 
coffee? You would ‘‘ask for a suspension of public 
opinion.”’ That is what Senator Dilworthy did. It 
is the custom. He got the usual amount of suspen- 
sion. Far and wide he was called a thief, a briber, 
a promoter of steamship subsidies, railway swindles, 
robberies of the government in all possible forms and 
fashions. Newspapers and everybody else called 
him a pious hypocrite, a sleek, oily fraud, a reptile 
who manipulated temperance movements, prayer- 
meetings, Sunday-schools, public charities, mission- 
ary enterprises, all for his private benefit. And as 
these charges were backed up by what seemed to be 
good and sufficient evidence, they were believed 
with national unanimity. 

Then Mr. Dilworthy made another move. He 
moved instantly to Washington and ‘‘demanded an 
investigation.’’ Even this could not pass without 
comment. Many papers used language to this effect: 


Senator Dilworthy’s remains have demanded an investi- 
gation. ‘This sounds fine and bold and innocent; but when we 
reflect that they demand it at the hands of the Senate of the 
United States, it simply becomes matter for derision. One 


277 


MARK TWAIN 


might as well set the gentlemen detained in the public prisons 
to trying each other. This investigation is likely to be like all 
other Senatorial “‘investigations’”—amusing but not useful. 
Query. Why does the Senate still stick to this pompous word, 
“Investigation ’’? One does not blindfold one’s self in order to 
investigate an object. 


Mr. Dilworthy appeared in his place in the Senate 
and offered a resolution appointing a committee to 
investigate his case. It was carried, of course, and 
the committee was appointed. Straightway the 
newspapers said: 


Under the guise of appointing a committee to investigate 
the late Mr. Dilworthy, the Senate yesterday appointed a com- 
mittee to investigate his accuser, Mr. Noble. ‘This is the exact 
spirit and meaning of the resolution, and the committee cannot 
try anybody but Mr. Noble without overstepping its authority. 
That Mr. Dilworthy had the effrontery to offer such a resolution 
will surprise no one, and that the Senate could entertain it 
without blushing and pass it without shame will surprise no one. 
We are now reminded of a note which we have received from 
the notorious burglar Murphy, in which he finds fault with a 
statement of ours to the effect that he had served one term in 
the penitentiary and also one in the U. S. Senate. He says, 
“The latter statement is untrue and does me great injustice.” 
After an unconscious sarcasm like that, further comment is 
unnecessary. 


And yet the Senate was roused by the Dilworthy 
trouble. Many speeches were made. One Senator 
(who was accused in the public prints of selling his 
chances of re-election to his opponent for fifty thou- 
sand dollars and had not yet denied the charge) 
said that ‘‘the presence in the capital of such a 
creature as this man Noble, to testify against a 
brother member of their body, was an insult to the 
Senate.” 

278 


THE ‘GILDED’ @GE 


Another Senator said, ‘‘Let the investigation go 
on; and let it make an example of this man Noble; 
let it teach him and men like him that they could 
not attack the reputation of a United States Senator 
with impunity.”’ 

Another said he was glad the investigation was 
to be had, ‘“‘for it was high time that the Senate 
should crush some cur like this man Noble, and thus 
show his kind that it was able and resolved to up- 
hold its ancient dignity.’ 

A bystander laughed at this finely delivered per- 
oration, and said: 

“Why, this is the Senator who franked his bag- 
gage home through the mails last week—registered, 
at that. However, perhaps he was merely engaged 
in ‘upholding the ancient dignity of the Senate,’ 
then.” 

‘‘No, the modern dignity of it,” said another 
bystander. ‘‘It don’t resemble its ancient dignity, 
but it fits its modern style like a glove.” 

There being no law against making offensive re- 
marks about U. S. Senators, this conversation, and 
others like it, continued without let or hindrance. 
But our business is with the investigating committee. 

Mr. Noble appeared before the committee of the 
Senate, and testified to the following effect: 

He said that he was a member of the state legis- 
lature of the Happy-Land-of-Canaan; that on the 
day of he assembled himself together at 
the city of Saint’s Rest, the capital of the state, 
along with his brother legislators; that he was 
known to be a political enemy of Mr. Dilworthy 

279 


MARK TWAIN 


and bitterly opposed to his re-election; that Mr. 
Dilworthy came to Saint’s Rest and was reported 
to be buying pledges of votes with money; that 
the said Dilworthy sent for him to come to his room 
in the hotel at night, and he went; was introduced 
to Mr. Dilworthy; called two or three times afterward 
at Dilworthy’s request—usually after midnight; Mr. 
Dilworthy urged him to vote for Him; Noble de- 
clined; Dilworthy argued; said he was bound to be 
elected, and could then ruin him (Noble) if he 
voted no; said he had every railway and every 
public office and stronghold of political power in 
the state under his thumb, and could set up or pull 
down any man he chose; gave instances showing 
where and how he had used this power; if Noble 
would vote for him he would make him a Repre- 
sentative in Congress; Noble still declined to vote, 
and said he did not believe Dilworthy was going to 
be elected; Dilworthy showed a list of men who 
would vote for him—a majority of the legislature; 
gave further proofs of his power by telling Noble 
everything the opposing party had done or said in 
secret caucus; claimed that his spies reported every- 
thing to him, and that— 

Here a member of the committee objected that 
this evidence was irrelevant and also in opposition to 
the spirit of the committee’s instructions, because if 
these things reflected upon any one it was upon Mr. 
Dilworthy. The chairman said, let the person pro- 
ceed with his statement—the committee could ex- 
clude evidence that did not bear upon the case. 

Mr. Noble continued. He said that his party 


280 


THE GILDED AGE 


would cast him out if he voted for Mr. Dilworthy; 
Dilworthy said that that would inure to his benefit, 
because he would then be a recognized friend of his 
(Dilworthy’s) and he could consistently exalt him 
politically and make his fortune; Noble said he was 
poor, and it was hard to tempt him so; Dilworthy 
said he would fix that; he said, ‘‘Tell me what you 
want, and say you will vote for me’; Noble could 
not say; Dilworthy said, ‘I will give you five thou- 
sand dollars—”’ 

A committeeman said, impatiently, that this stuff 
was all outside the case, and valuable time was being 
wasted; this was all a plain reflection upon a brother 
Senator. The chairman said it was the quickest way 
to proceed, and the evidence need have no weight. 

Mr. Noble continued. He said he told Dilworthy 
that five thousand dollars was not much to pay for 
a man’s honor, character, and everything that was 
worth having; Dilworthy said he was surprised; 
he considered five thousand dollars a fortune for 
some men; asked what Noble’s figure was; Noble 
said he could not think ten thousand dollars 
too little; Dilworthy said it was a great deal too 
much; he would not do it for any other man, but 
he had conceived a liking for Noble, and where he 
liked a man his heart yearned to help him; he was 
aware that Noble was poor, and had a family to sup- 
port, and that he bore an unblemished reputation 
at home; for such a man and such a man’s influence 
he could do much, and feel that to help such a man 
would be an act that would have its reward; the 
struggles of the poor always touched him; he believed 

281 


MARK TWAIN 


that Noble would make a good use of this money 
and that it would cheer many a sad heart and needy 
home; he would give the ten thousand dollars; all he 
desired in return was that, when the balloting began, 
Noble should cast his vote for him and should ex- 
plain to the legislature that upon looking into the 
charges against Mr. Dilworthy of bribery, corrup- 
tion, and forwarding stealing measures in Congress 
he had found them to be base calumnies upon a man 
whose motives were pure and whose character was 
stainless; he then took from his pocket two thousand 
dollars in bank-bills and handed them to Noble, and 
got another package containing five thousand dollars 
out of his trunk and gave to him also. He— 

A committeeman jumped up and said: 

‘‘At last, Mr. Chairman, this shameless person has 
arrived at the point. This is sufficient and conclu- 
sive. By his own confession he has received a bribe 
and did it deliberately. This is a grave offense, and 
cannot be passed over in silence, sir. By the terms 
of our instructions we can now proceed to mete out 
to him such punishment as is meet for one who has 
maliciously brought disrespect upon a Senator of the 
United States. We have no need to hear the rest 
of his evidence.” 

The chairman said it would be better and more 
regular to proceed with the investigation according 
to the usual forms. A note would be made of Mr. 
Noble’s admission. 

Mr. Noble continued. He said that it was now 
far past midnight; that he took his leave and went 
straight to certain legislators, told them everything, 

282 


THE GILDED AGE 


made them count the money and also told them of 
the exposure he would make in joint convention; he 
made that exposure, as all the world knew. The 
rest of the ten thousand dollars was to be paid the 
day after Dilworthy was elected. 

Senator Dilworthy was now asked to take the 
stand and tell what he knew about the man Noble. 
The Senator wiped his mouth with his handkerchief, 
adjusted his white cravat, and said that but for the 
fact that public morality required an example, for 
-the warning of future Nobles, he would beg that in 
Christian charity this poor misguided creature might 
be forgiven and set free. He said that it was but 
too evident that this person had approached him in 
the hope of obtaining a bribe; he had intruded him- 
self time and again, and always with moving stories 
of his poverty. Mr. Dilworthy said that his heart 
had bled for him—insomuch that he had several 
times been on the point of trying to get some one to 
do something for him. Some instinct had told him 
from the beginning that this was a bad man, an evil- 
minded man, but his inexperience of such had 
blinded him to his real motives, and hence he had 
never dreamed that his object was to undermine the 
purity of a United States Senator. He regretted 
that it was plain now, that such was the man’s object 
and that punishment could not with safety to the 
Senate’s honor be withheld. He grieved to say that 
one of those mysterious dispensations of an inscruta- 
ble Providence which are decreed from time to time 
by His wisdom and for His righteous purposes, had 
given this conspirator’s tale a color of plausibility— 

283 


MARK TWAIN 


but this would soon disappear under the clear light 
of truth which would now be thrown upon the 
case. 

It so happened (said the Senator) that about the 
time in question, a poor young friend of mine, living 
in a distant town of my state, wished to establish a 
bank; he asked me to lend him the necessary money; 
I said I had no money just then, but would try to 
borrow it. The day before the election a friend 
said to me that my election expenses must be 
very large—especially my hotel bills—and offered - 
to lend me some money. Remembering my young 
friend, I said I would like a few thousands now, and 
a few more by and by; whereupon he gave me two 
packages of bills said to contain two thousand 
dollars and five thousand dollars respectively; I 
did not open the packages or count the money; I 
did not give any note or receipt for the same; I 
made no memorandum of the transaction, and 
neither did my friend. That night this evil man 
Noble came troubling me again. I could not rid 
myself of him, though my time was very precious. 
He mentioned my young friend and said he was very 
anxious to have seven thousand dollars now to begin 
his banking operations with, and could wait a while 
for the rest. Noble wished to get the money and 
take it to him. I finally gave him the two packages 
of bills; I took no note or receipt from him, and made 
no memorandum of the matter. I no more look 
for duplicity and deception in another man than 
I would look for it in myself. I never thought of 
this man again until I was overwhelmed the next 

284 


THE GILDED AGE 


day by learning what a shameful use he had made 
of the confidence I had reposed in him and the 
money I had intrusted to his care. This is all, 
gentlemen. To the absolute truth of every detail 
of my statement I solemnly swear, and I call Him to 
witness who is the Truth and the loving Father of 
all whose lips abhor false speaking; I pledge my 
honor as a Senator, that I have spoken but the truth. 
May God forgive this wicked man—as I do. 

Mr. Noble—‘Senator Dilworthy, your bank -ac- 
count shows that up to that day, and even on that 
very day, you conducted all your financial business 
through the medium of checks instead of bills, and 
so kept careful record of every moneyed transaction. 
Why did you deal in bank-bills on this particular 
occasion?” 

The Chairman—‘‘The gentleman will please to 
remember that the committee is conducting this 
investigation.”’ 

Mr. Noble—‘‘Then will the committee ask the 
question?” 

The Chairman—‘‘The committee will—when it 
desires to know.”’ 

Mr. Noble—‘Which will not be during this cen- 
tury, perhaps.”’ 

The Chairman—‘‘ Another remark like that, sir, 
will procure you the attentions of the sergeant-at- 
arms.” 

Mr. Noble—‘*D 
the committee, too!”’ 

Several Committeemen—‘‘Mr. Chairman, this is 
contempt!’’ 


n the sergeant-at-arms, and 


285 


MARK TWAIN 


Mr. Noble—‘‘Contempt of whom?”’ 
‘“‘Of the committee! Of the Senate of the United 
States!” 

Mr. Noble—‘‘Then I am become the acknowl- 
edged representative of a nation. You know as well 
as I do that the whole nation hold as much as three- 
fifths of the United States Senate in entire contempt. 
Three-fifths of you are Dilworthys.”’ 

The sergeant-at-arms very soon put a quietus 
upon the observations of the representative of the 
nation, and convinced him that he was not in the 
over-free atmosphere of his Happy-Land-of-Canaan. 

The statement of Senator Dilworthy naturally 
carried conviction to the minds of the committee. 
It was close, logical, unanswerable; it bore many 
internal evidences of its truth. For instance, it is 
customary in all countries for business men to loan 
large sums of money in bank-bills instead of checks. 
It is customary for the lender to make no memoran- 
dum of the transaction. It is customary for the 
borrower to receive the money without making a 
memorandum of it, or giving a note or a receipt for 
it—because the borrower is not likely to die or 
forget about it. It is customary to lend nearly 
anybody money to start a bank with, especially if 
you have not the money to lend him and have to 
borrow it for the purpose. It is customary to carry 
large sums of money in bank-bills about your person 
or in your trunk. It is customary to hand a large 
sum in bank-bills to a man you have just been intro- 
duced to (if he asks you to do it) to be conveyed to 
a distant town and delivered to another party. It 

286 ; 


THE GILDED AGE 


is not customary to make a memorandum of this 
transaction; it is not customary for the conveyor 
to give a note or a receipt for the money; it is not 
customary to require that he shall get a note or a 
receipt from the man he is to convey it to in the 
distant town. It would be at least singular in you 
to say to the proposed conveyor, ‘‘You might be 
robbed; I will deposit the money in bank and send 
a check for it to my friend through the mail.” 

Very well. It being plain that Senator Dil- 
worthy’s statement was rigidly true, and this fact 
being strengthened by his adding to it the support 
of ‘‘his honor as a Senator,’’ the committee rendered 
a verdict of ‘‘Not proven that a bribe had been 
offered and accepted.’” This, in a manner, exon- 
erated Noble and let him escape. 

The committee made its report to the Senate, and 
that body proceeded to consider its acceptance. 
One Senator—indeed, several Senators—objected 
that the committee had failed of its duty; they had 
proved this man Noble guilty of nothing, they had 
meted out no punishment to him; if the report were 
accepted, he would go forth free and scatheless, 
glorying in his crime, and it would be a tacit admis- 
sion that any blackguard could insult the Senate of 
the United States and conspire against the sacred 
reputation of its members with impunity; the Senate 
owed it to the upholding of its ancient dignity to 
make an example of this man Noble—he should be 
crushed. 

An elderly Senator got up and took another view 
of the case. This was a Senator of the worn-out 

287 


MARK TWAIN 


and obsolete pattern; a man still lingering among 
the cobwebs of the past, and behind the spirit of 
the age. He said that there seemed to be a curious 
misunderstanding of the case. Gentlemen seemed 
exceedingly anxious to preserve and maintain the 
honor and dignity of the Senate. 

Was this to be done by trying an obscure adven- 
turer for attempting to trap a Senator into bribing 
him? Or would not the truer way be to find out 
whether the Senator was capable of being entrapped 
into so shameless an act, and then try him? Why, 
of course. Now the whole idea of the Senate 
seemed to be to shield the Senator and turn inquiry 
away from him. The true way to uphold the honor 
of the Senate was to have none but honorable men 
in its body. If this Senator had yielded to tempta- 
tion and had offered a bribe, he was a soiled man 
and ought to be instantly expelled; therefore he 
wanted the Senator tried, and not in the usual 
namby-pamby way, but in good earnest. He wanted 
to know the truth of this matter. For himself, he 
believed that the guilt of Senator Dilworthy was 
established beyond the shadow of a doubt; and he 
considered that in trifling with his case and shirking 
it the Senate was doing a shameful and cowardly 
thing—a thing which suggested that in its willing- 
ness to sit longer in the company of such a man, it 
was acknowledging that it was itself of a kind with 
him and was therefore not dishonored by his pres- 
ence. He desired that a rigid examination be made 
into Senator Dilworthy’s case, and that it be con- 
tinued clear into the approaching extra session if 

288 


THE GILDED AGE 


need be. There was no dodging this thing with the 
lame excuse of want of time. 

In reply, an honorable Senator said that he 
thought it would be as well to drop the matter and 
accept the committee’s report. He said with some 
jocularity that the more one agitated this thing, the 
worse it was for the agitator. He was not able to 
deny that he believed Senator Dilworthy to be 
guilty—but what then? Was it such an extraordi- 
nary case? For his part, even allowing the Senator 
to be guilty, he did not think his continued presence 
during the few remaining days of the session would 
contaminate the Senate to a dreadful degree. [This 
humorous sally was received with smiling admiration 
—notwithstanding it was not wholly new, having 
originated with the Massachusetts General in the 
House a day or two before, upon the occasion of the 
proposed expulsion of a member for selling his vote 
for money.] 

The Senate recognized the fact that it could not 
be contaminated by sitting a few days longer with 
Senator Dilworthy, and so it accepted the commit- 
tee’s report and dropped the unimportant matter. 

Mr. Dilworthy occupied his seat to the last hour 
of the session. He said that his people had reposed 
a trust in him, and it was not for him to desert 
them. He would remain at his post till he perished, 
if need be. 

His voice was lifted up and his vote cast for the 
last time, in support of an ingenious measure con- 
trived by the General from Massachusetts whereby 
the President’s salary was proposed to be doubled 

289 


MARK TWAIN 


and every Congressman paid several thousand dollars 
extra for work previously done, under an accepted 
contract, and already paid for once and receipted for. 
Senator Dilworthy was offered a grand ovation by 
his friends at home, who said that their affection 
for him and their confidence in him were in no wise 
impaired by the persecutions that had pursued 
him, and that he was still good enough for them. 


1The seven thousand dollars left by Mr. Noble with his state 
legislature was placed in safe keeping to await the claim of the 
legitimate owner. Senator Dilworthy made one little effort through 
his protégé, the embryo banker, to recover it, but there being no 
notes of hand or other memoranda to support the claim, it failed. 
The moral of which is, that when one loans money to start a 
bank with, one ought to take the party’s written acknowledgment 
of the fact. 


CHAPTER XXIX 


THE FATE OF LAURA 
tryin; chau 


“Ow holan whath ythew prowte 
kynthoma ogas marowe’”’— 


OR some days Laura had been a free woman 

once more. During this time, she had experi- 
enced—first, two or three days of triumph, excite- 
ment, congratulations, a sort of sunburst of gladness, 
after a long night of gloom and anxiety; then two 
or three days of calming down, by degrees—a re- 
ceding of tides, a quieting of the storm-wash to a 
murmurous surf-beat, a diminishing of devastating 
winds to a refrain that bore the spirit of a truce— 
days given to solitude, rest, self-communion, and 
the reasoning of herself into a realization of the fact 
that she was actually done with bolts and bars, 
prison horrors and impending death; then came a 
day whose hours filed slowly by her, each laden with 
some remnant, some remaining fragment of the 
dreadful time so lately ended—a day which, closing 
at last, left the past a fading shore behind her and 
turned her eyes toward the broad sea of the future. 
So speedily do we put the dead away and come back 

291 


MARK TWAIN 


to our place in the ranks to march in the pilgrimage 
of life again! 

And now the sun rose once more and ushered 
in the first day of what Laura comprehended and 
accepted as a new life. 

The past had sunk below the horizon, and existed 
no more for her; she was done with it for all time. 
She was gazing out over the trackless expanses of 
the future now, with troubled eyes. Life must be 
begun again—at eight and twenty years of age. 
And where to begin? The page was blank, and 
waiting for its first record; so this was indeed a 
momentous day. 

Her thoughts drifted back, stage by stage, over 
her career. As far as the long highway receded 
over the plain of her life, it was lined with the 
gilded and pillared splendors of her ambition all 
crumbled to ruin and ivy-grown; every milestone 
marked a disaster; there was no green spot remain- 
ing anywhere in memory of a hope that had found 
its fruition; the unresponsive earth had uttered no 
voice of flowers in testimony that one who was 
blest had gone that road. 

Her life had been a failure. That was span she 
said. No more of that. She would now look the 
future in the face; she would mark her course upon 
the chart of life, and follow it; follow it without 
swerving, through rocks and shoals, through storm 
and calm, to a haven of rest and peace—or, ship- 
wreck. Let the end be what it might, she would 
mark her course now—to-day—and follow it. 

On her table lay six or seven notes. They were 

292 


THE GILDED AGE 


from lovers; from some of the prominent names in 
the land; men whose devotion had survived even the 
grisly revealments of her character which the courts 
had uncurtained; men who knew her now, just as 
she was, and yet pleaded as for their lives for the 
dear privilege of calling the murderess wife. 

As she read these passionate, these worshiping, 
these supplicating missives, the woman in her nature 
confessed itself; a strong yearning came upon her 
to lay her head upon a loyal breast and find rest 
from the conflict of life, solace for her griefs, the 
healing of love for her bruised heart. 

With her forehead resting upon her hand, she 
sat thinking, thinking, while the unheeded moments 
winged their flight. It was one of those mornings 
in early spring when nature seems just stirring to 
a half consciousness out of a long, exhausting leth- 
argy; when the first faint balmy airs go wandering 
about, whispering the secret of the coming change; 
when the abused brown grass, newly relieved of 
snow, seems considering whether it can be worth the 
trouble and worry of contriving its green raiment 
again only to fight the inevitable fight with the im- 
placable winter and be vanquished and buried once 
more; when the sun shines out and a few birds 
venture forth and lift up a forgotten song; when a 
strange stillness and suspense pervade the waiting 
air. It is a time when one’s spirit is subdued and 
sad, one knows not why; when the past seems a 
storm-swept desolation, life a vanity and a burden, 
and the future but a way to death. It is a time 
when one is filled with vague longings; when one 

293 


MARK TWAIN 


dreams of flight to peaceful islands in the remote 
solitudes of the sea, or folds his hands and says, 
What is the use of struggling, and toiling and worry- 
ing any more? Let us give it all up. 

It was into such a mood as this that Laura had 
drifted from the musings which the letters of her 
lovers had called up. Now she lifted her head and 
noted with surprise how the day had wasted. She 
thrust the letters aside, rose up and went and stood 
at the window. But she was soon thinking again, 
and was only gazing into vacancy. 

By and by she turned; her countenance had 
cleared; the dreamy look was gone out of her face; 
all indecision had vanished; the poise of her head 
and the firm set of her lips told that her resolution 
was formed. She moved toward the table with all 
the old dignity in her carriage, and all the old pride 
in her mien. She took up each letter in its turn, 
touched a match to it and watched it slowly consume 
to ashes. Then she said: 

“‘T have landed upon a foreign shore, and burned 
my ships behind me. These letters were the last 
thing that held me in sympathy with any remnant or 
belonging of the old life. Henceforth that life and 
all that appertains to it are as dead to me and as 
far removed from me as if I were become a denizen 
of another world.”’ 

She said that love was not for her—the time that 
it could have satisfied her heart was gone by and 
could not return; the opportunity was lost, nothing 
could restore it. She said there could be no love 
without respect, and she would only despise a man 

294 


THE GILDED AGE 


who could content himself with a thing like her. 
Love, she said, was a woman’s first necessity; love 
being forfeited, there was but one thing left that could 
give a passing zest to a wasted life, and that was 
fame, admiration, the applause of the multitude. 

And so her resolution was taken. She would turn 
to that final resort of the disappointed of her sex, 
the lecture platform. She would array herself in 
fine attire, she would adorn herself with jewels, and 
stand in her isolated magnificence before massed 
audiences and enchant them with her eloquence and 
amaze them with her unapproachable beauty. She 
would move from city to city like a queen of ro- 
mance, leaving marveling multitudes behind her and 
impatient multitudes awaiting her coming. Her 
life, during one hour of each day, upon the plat- 
form, would be a rapturous intoxication—and when 
the curtain fell, and the lights were out, and the 
people gone, to nestle in their homes and forget 
her, she would find in sleep oblivion of her home- 
lessness, if she could, if not she would brave out the 
night in solitude and wait for the next day’s hour of 
ecstasy. : 

So, to take up life and begin again was no great 
evil. She saw her way. She would be brave and 
strong; she would make the best of what was left 
for her among the possibilities. 

She sent for the lecture-agent, and matters were 
soon arranged. 

Straightway all the papers were filled with her 
name, and all the dead walls flamed with it. The 
papers called down imprecations upon her head; 

295 


MARK TWAIN 


they reviled her without stint; they wondered if all 
sense of decency was dead in this shameless mur- 
deress, this brazen lobbyist, this heartless seducer of 
the affections of weak and misguided men; they im- 
plored the people, for the sake of their pure wives, 
their sinless daughters, for the sake of decency, for 
the sake of public morals, to give this wretched 
creature such a rebuke as should be an all-sufficient 
evidence to her and to such as her that there was a 
limit where the flaunting of their foul acts and opin- 
ions before the world must stop; certain of them, 
with a higher art, and to her a finer cruelty, a 
sharper torture, uttered no abuse, but always spoke 
of her in terms of mocking eulogy and ironical ad- 
miration. Everybody talked about the new wonder, 
canvassed the theme of her proposed discourse, and 
marveled how she would handle it. 

Laura’s few friends wrote to her or came and 
talked with her, and pleaded with her to retire while 
it was yet time, and not attempt to face the gather- 
ing storm. But it was fruitless. She was stung to 
the quick by the comments of the newspapers; her 
spirit was roused, her ambition was towering, now. 
She was more determined than ever. She would 
show these people what a hunted and persecuted 
woman could do. 

The eventful night came. Laura arrived before 
the great lecture-hall in a close carriage within five 
minutes of the time set for the lecture to begin. 
When she stepped out of the vehicle her heart beat 
fast and her eyes flashed with exultation; the whole 
street was packed with people, and she could hardly 

296 


THE GILDED AGE 


force her way to the hall! She reached the ante- 
room, threw off her wraps, and placed herself before 
the dressing-glass. She turned herself this way and 
that—everything was satisfactory, her attire was 
perfect. She smoothed her hair, rearranged a jewel 
here and there, and all the while her heart sang 
within her, and her face was radiant. She had not 
been so happy for ages and ages, it seemed to her. 
Oh, no, she had never been so overwhelmingly grate- 
ful and happy in her whole life before. The lecture- 
agent appeared at the door. She waved him away 
and said: 

“Do not disturb me. I want no introduction. 
And do not fear for me; the moment the hands 
point to eight I will step upon the platform.”’ 

He disappeared. She held her watch before her. 
She was so impatient that the second hand seemed 
whole tedious minutes dragging its way around the 
circle. At last the supreme moment came, and with 
head erect and the bearing of an empress she swept 
through the door and stood upon the stage. Her 
eyes fell upon— 

Only a vast, brilliant emptiness—there were not 
forty people in the house! There were only a hand- 
ful of coarse men and ten or twelve still coarser 
women, lolling upon the benches and scattered about 
singly and in couples. 

Her pulses stood still, her limbs quaked, the glad- 
ness went out of her face. There was a moment of 
silence, and then a brutal laugh and an explosion of 
cat-calls and hisses saluted her from the audience. 
The clamor grew stronger and louder, and insulting 

297 


MARK TWAIN 


speeches were shouted at her. A _ half-intoxicated 
man rose up and threw something, which missed 
her but bespattered a chair at her side, and this 
evoked an outburst of laughter and boisterous ad- 
miration. She was bewildered, her strength was 
forsaking her. She reeled away from the platform, 
reached the anteroom, and dropped helpless upon a 
sofa. The lecture-agent ran in, with a hurried ques- 
tion upon his lips; but she put forth her hands, and 
with the tears raining from her eyes, said: 

“Oh, do not speak! Take me away—please 
take me away, out of this dreadful place! Oh, this 
is like all my life—failure, disappointment, misery 
—always misery, always failure. What have I done, 
to be so pursued! Take me away, I beg of you, I 
implore you!” 

Upon the pavement she was hustled by the mob, 
the surging masses roared her name and accompanied 
it with every species of insulting epithet; they 
thronged after the carriage, hooting, jeering, cursing, 
and even assailing the vehicle with missiles. A 
stone crushed through a blind, wounding Laura’s 
forehead, and so stunning her that she hardly knew 
what further transpired during her flight. 

It was long before her faculties were wholly re- 
stored, and then she found herself lying on the floor 
by a sofa in her own sitting-room, and alone. So 
she supposed she must have sat down upon the sofa 
and afterward fallen. She raised herself up, with 
difficulty, for the air was chilly and her limbs were 
stiff. She turned up the gas and sought the glass. 
She hardly knew herself, so worn and old she looked, 

298 


THE GILDED AGE 


and so marred with blood were her features. The 
night was far spent, and a dead stillness reigned. 
She sat down by her table, leaned her elbows upon 
it, and put her face in her hands. 

Her thoughts wandered back over her old life 
again and her tears flowed unrestrained. Her pride 
was humbled, her spirit was broken. Her memory 
found but one resting-place; it lingered about her 
young girlhood with a caressing regret; it dwelt 
upon it as the one brief interval in her life that bore 
no curse. She saw herself again in the budding 
grace of her twelve years, decked in her dainty pride 
of ribbons, consorting with the bees and the butter- 
flies, believing in fairies, holding confidential con- 
verse with the flowers, busying herself all day long 
with airy trifles that were as weighty to her as the 
affairs that tax the brains of diplomats and em- 
perors. She was without sin, then, and unac- 
quainted with grief; the world was full of sunshine 
and her heart was full of music. From that—to this! 

“Tf I could only die!’ she said. “If I could 
only go back, and be as I was then, for one hour— 
and hold my father’s hand in mine again, and see all 
the household about me, as in that old innocent time 
—and then die! My God, Iam humbled, my pride is 
all gone, my stubborn heart repents—have pity!” 

When the spring morning dawned, the form still 
sat there, the elbows resting upon the table and the 
face upon the hands. All day long the figure sat 
there, the sunshine enriching its costly raiment and 
flashing from its jewels; twilight came, and presently 
the stars, but still the figure remained; the moon 

299 


MARK TWAIN 


found it there still, and framed the picture with the 
shadow of the window-sash, and flooded it with 
mellow light; by and by the darkness swallowed it 
up, and later the gray dawn revealed it again; the 
new day grew toward its prime, and still the forlorn 
presence was undisturbed. 

But now the keepers of the house had become 
uneasy; their periodical knockings still finding no 
response, they burst open the door. 

The jury of inquest found that death had resulted 
from heart disease, and was instant and painless. 
That was all. Merely heart disease. 


CHAPTER XXX 
WASHINGTON HAWKINS TAKES A NEW START 


Han ager ikke ilde som veed at vende. 


Wanna unyanpi kta. Niye de kta he? 
Iapt Oaye, vol. i, no. 7. 


oc HAWKINS, years gone by, had yielded, 
after many a struggle, to the migratory and 
speculative instinct of our age and our people, and 
had wandered further and further westward upon 
trading ventures. Settling finally in Melbourne, 
Australia, he ceased to roam, became a steady-going, 
substantial merchant, and prospered greatly. His 
life lay beyond the theater of this tale. 

His remittances had supported the Hawkins 
family, entirely, from the time of his father’s death 
until latterly when Laura, by her efforts in Wash- 
ington, had been able to assist in this work. Clay 
was away on a long absence in some of the eastward 
islands when Laura’s troubles began, trying (and 
almost in vain) to arrange certain interests which 
had become disordered through a dishonest agent, 
and consequently he knew nothing of the murder 
till he returned and read his letters and papers. His 
natural impulse was to hurry to the States and save 
his sister, if possible, for he loved her with a deep 

301 


MARK TWAIN 


and abiding affection. His business was so crippled 
now, and so deranged, that to leave it would be 
ruin; therefore he sold out at a sacrifice that left 
him considerably reduced in worldly possessions, 
and began his voyage to San Francisco. Arrived 
there, he perceived by the newspapers that the trial 
was near its close. At Salt Lake later telegrams 
told him of the acquittal, and his gratitude was 
boundless—so boundless, indeed, that sleep was 
driven from his eyes by the pleasurable excitement 
almost as effectually as preceding weeks of anxiety 
had done it. He shaped his course straight for 
Hawkeye, now, and his meeting with his mother and 
the rest of the household was joyful—albeit he had 
been away so long that he seemed almost a stranger 
in his own home. 

But the greetings and congratulations were hardly 
finished when all the journals in the land clamored 
the news of Laura’s miserable death. Mrs. Haw- 
kins was prostrated by this last blow, and it was 
well that Clay was at her side to stay her with com- 
forting words and take upon himself the ordering of 
the household with its burden of labors and cares. 

Washington Hawkins had scarcely more than en- 
tered upon that decade which carries one to the full 
blossom of manhood which we term the beginning of 
middle age, and yet a brief sojourn at the capital of 
the nation had made him old. His hair was already 
turning gray when the late session of Congress began 
its sittings; it grew grayer still, and rapidly, after 
the memorable day that saw Laura proclaimed a 
murderess; it waxed grayer and still grayer during 

302 


THE GILDED AGE 


the lagging suspense that succeeded it and after the 
crash which ruined his last hope—the failure of his 
bill in the Senate and the destruction of its cham- 
pion, Dilworthy. A few days later, when he stood 
uncovered while the last prayer was pronounced over 
Laura’s grave, his hair was whiter and his face 
hardly less old than the venerable minister’s whose 
words were sounding in his ears. 

A week after this, he was sitting in a double- 
bedded room in a cheap boarding-house in Wash- 
ington, with Colonel Sellers. The two had been 
living together lately, and this mutual cavern of 
theirs the Colonel sometimes referred to as their 
‘““premises’’ and sometimes as their “‘apartments’’— 
more particularly when conversing with persons out- 
side. A canvas-covered modern trunk, marked ‘'G. 
W. H.,’’ stood on end by the door, strapped and ready 
for a journey; on it lay a small morocco satchel, also 
marked ‘‘G. W. H.’’ There was another trunk 
close by—a worn and scarred and ancient hair 
relic, with ‘‘B. S.’”’ wrought in brass nails on its 
top; on it lay a pair of saddle-bags that probably 
knew more about the last century than they could 
tell. Washington got up and walked the floor 
awhile in a restless sort of way, and finally was 
about to sit down on the hair trunk. 

‘“‘Stop, don’t sit down on that!’ exclaimed the 
Colonel. ‘‘There, now—that’s all right—the chair’s 
better. I couldn’t get another trunk like that—not 
another like it in America, I reckon.” 

“T am afraid not,” said Washington, with a faint 
attempt at a smile. 

393 


MARK TWAIN 


‘No, indeed; the man is dead that made that 
trunk and that saddle-bags.”’ 

“Are his great-grandchildren still living?’ said 
Washington, with levity only in the words, not in 
the tone. 

“Well, I don’t know—I hadn’t thought. of that— 
but anyway they can’t make trunks and saddle- 
bags like that, if they are—no man can,” said the 
Colonel with honest simplicity. ‘‘Wife didn’t like 
to see me going off with that trunk—she said it was 
nearly certain to be stolen.”’ 

“Why?” 

“Why? Why, aren’t trunks always being stolen?’ 

‘*Well, yes—some kinds of trunks are.” 

‘“Very well, then; this is some kind of a trunk— 
and an almighty rare kind, too.” 

‘“Yes, I believe it is.” 

‘Well, then, why shouldn’t a man want to steal 
it if he got a chance?” 

‘Indeed I don’t know. Why should he?” 

‘Washington, I never heard anybody talk like 
you. Suppose you were a thief, and that trunk was 
lying around and nobody watching—wouldn’t you 
steal it! Come, now, answer fair—wouldn’t you 
steal it?” 

‘Well, now, since you corner me,I don’t know but 
I would take it—but I wouldn’t consider it stealing.” 

“You wouldn’t! Well, that beats me. Now, 
what would you call stealing?’’ 

‘““Why, taking property is stealing.’’ 

‘“Property! Now, what a way to talk that is. 
What do you suppose that trunk is worth?” 

304 


THE GILDED AGE 


“Is it in good repair?”’ 

‘Perfect. Hair rubbed off a little, but the main 
structure is perfectly sound.”’ 

“Does it leak anywhere?”’ 

“Leak? Do you want to carry water in it? 
What do you mean by does it leak?” 

““Why—a—do the clothes fall out of it when 
it is—when it is stationary?” 

“Confound it, Washington, you are trying to 
make fun of me. I don’t know what has got into 
you to-day; you act mighty curious. What is the 
matter with you?’ 

“Well, I'll tell you, old friend. I am almost 
happy. J am, indeed. It wasn’t Clay’s telegram 
that hurried me up so and got me ready to start 
with you. It was a letter from Louise.” 

‘Good! What is it? What does she say?” 

‘She says come home—her father has consented, 
at last.” 

‘“My boy, I want to congratulate you; I want to 
shake you by the hand! It’s a long turn that has 
no lane at the end of it, as the proverb says, 
or somehow that way. You'll be happy yet, 
and Beriah Sellers will be there to see, thank 
God!’ 

“I believe it. General Boswell is pretty nearly 
a poor man now. The railroad that was going to 
build up Hawkeye made short work of him, along 
with the rest. He isn’t so opposed to a son-in-law 
without a fortune now.” 

“Without a fortune, indeed! Why, that Ten- 
nessee Land—’”’ 

305 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Never mind the Tennessee land, Colonel. I am 
done with that, forever and forever—”’ 

‘“‘Why, no! You can’t mean to say—’” 

‘‘My father, away back yonder, years ago, bought 
it for a blessing for his children, and—”’ 

“Indeed he did! Si Hawkins said to me—” 

‘It proved a curse to him as long as he lived, 
and never a curse like it was inflicted upon any 
man’s heirs—’’ 

‘I’m bound to say there’s more or less truth—”’ 

‘‘It began to curse me when I was a baby, and it 
has cursed every hour of my life to this day—”’ 

“Lord, Lord, but it’s so! Time and again my 
wife—”’ 

“‘I depended on it all through my boyhood and 
never tried to do an honest stroke of work for my 
lian 

“Right bee then=you—— 

“I have chased it years and years as children 
chase butterflies. We might all have been prosper- 
ous now; we might all have been happy, all these 
heartbreaking years, if we had accepted our poverty 
at first and gone contentedly to work and built up 
our own weal by our own toil and sweat—”’ 

‘It’s so, it’s so; bless my soul, how often I’ve 
told Si Hawkins—”’ 

‘‘Instead of that, we have suffered more than the 
damned themselves suffer! I loved my father, and 
I honor his memory and recognize his good inten- 
tions; but I grieve for his mistaken ideas of con- 
ferring happiness upon his children. I am going 
to begin my life over again, and begin it and end 

306 


THE GILDED AGE 


it with good solid work! I'll leave my children no 
Tennessee Land!” 

“Spoken like a man, sir, spoken like a man! 
Your hand again, my boy! And always remember 
that when a word of advice from Beriah Sellers can 
help, it is at your service. I’m going to begin 
again, too!” 

‘Indeed!’ 

‘“Yes, sir. I’ve seen enough to show me where 
my mistake was. The law is what I was born for. 
I shall begin the study of the law. Heavens and 
earth, but that Braham’s a wonderful man—a won- 
derful man, sir! Such a head! And such a way 
with him! But I could see that he was jealous of 
me. ‘The little licks I got in in the course of my 
argument before the jury—”’ 

“Your argument! Why, you were a witness.”’ 

‘Oh, yes, to the popular eye, to the popular eye 
—but I knew when I was dropping information and 
when I was letting drive at the court with an insidi- 
ous argument. -But the court knew it, bless you, 
and weakened every time! And Braham knew it. 
I just reminded him of it in a quiet way, and its final 
result, and he said in a whisper, ‘You did it, Colonel, 
you did it, sir—but keep it mum for my sake; and 
I'll tell you what you do,’ says he, ‘you go into the 
law, Colonel Sellers—go into the law, sir; that’s 
your native element!’ And into the law the sub- 
scriber is going. There’s worlds of money in it!— 
whole worlds of money! Practise first in Hawkeye, 
then in Jefferson, then in St. Louis, then in New 
York! In the metropolis of the Western world! 

307 


MARK TWAIN 


Climb, and climb, and climb—and wind up on the 
Supreme bench. Beriah Sellers, Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court of the United States, sir! A 
made man for all time and eternity! That’s the 
way I block it out, sir—and it’s as clear as day— 
clear as the rosy morn!” 

Washington had heard little of this. The first 
reference to Laura’s trial had brought the old de- 
jection to his face again, and he stood gazing out 
of the window at nothing, lost in reverie. 

There was a knock—the postman handed in a 
letter. It was from Obedstown, East Tennessee, 
and was for Washington. He opened it. There 
was a note saying that inclosed he would please 
find a bill for the current year’s taxes on the seventy- 
five thousand acres of Tennessee Land belonging to 
the estate of Silas Hawkins, deceased, and added 
that the money must be paid within sixty days or 
the land would be sold at public auction for the 
taxes, as provided by law. The bill was for one 
hundred and eighty dollars—something more than 
twice the market value of the land, perhaps. 

Washington hesitated. Doubts flitted through 
his mind. The old instinct came upon him to cling 
to the land just a little longer and give it one more 
chance. He walked the floor feverishly, his mind 
tortured by indecision. Presently he stopped, took 
out his pocket-book and counted his money. Two 
hundred and thirty dollars—it was all he had in 
the world. 

“One hundred and eighty . . . from two hundred 
and thirty,” he said to himself. ‘‘Fifty left... . It 

308 


THE GILDED AGE 


is enough to get me home. .. . Shall I do it, or 
shall I not? . . . I wish I had somebody to decide 
for me.” 


The pocket-book lay open in his hand, with 
Louise’s small letter in view. His eye fell upon 
that, and it decided him. 

“It shall go for taxes,’’ he said, ‘‘and never tempt 
me or mine any more!” 

He opened the window and stood there tearing 
the tax bill to bits and watching the breeze waft 
them away, till all were gone. 

*“The spell is broken, the life-long curse 1s ended!’’ 
he said. ‘‘Let us go.” 

The baggage- wagon had arrived; five minutes 
later the two friends were mounted upon their lug- 
gage in it, and rattling off toward the station, the 
Colonel endeavoring to sing ‘‘Homeward Bound,” 
a song whose words he knew, but whose tune, as 
he rendered it, was a trial to auditors. 


CHAPTER XXXI 
LUCK WILL TURN. A JOYFUL SURPRISE 


Gedi kanadiben tsannawa. 


—La xalog, la xamaih mi-x-ul nu qiza u quial gih, u quial agab? 
Rabinal-Ack#. 


HILIP STERLING’S circumstances were be- 
coming straitened. The prospect was gloomy. 
His long siege of unproductive labor was beginning 
to tell upon his spirits; but what told still more upon 
them was the undeniable fact that the promise of 
ultimate success diminished every day now. That 
is to say, the tunnel had reached a point in the hill 
which was considerably beyond where the coal-vein 
should pass (according to all his calculations) if 
there were a coal-vein there; and so, every foot that 
the tunnel now progressed seemed to carry it further 
away from the object of the search. 
Sometimes he ventured to hope that he had made 
a mistake in estimating the direction which the vein 
should naturally take after crossing the valley and 
entering the hill. Upon such occasions he would go 
into the nearest mine on the vein he was hunting 
for, and once more get the bearings of the deposit 
and mark out its probable course; but the result 
was the same every time; his tunnel had manifestly 
pierced beyond the natural point of junction; and 
310 


THE GILDED AGE 


then his spirits fell a little lower. His men had 
already lost faith, and he often overheard them 
Saying it was perfectly plain that there was no coal 
in the hill. 

_Foremen and laborers from neighboring mines, 
and no end of experienced loafers from the village, 
visited the tunnel from time to time, and their 
verdicts were always the same and always disheart- 
ening—‘‘No coal in that hill.”’” Now and then 
Philip would sit down and think it all over and 
wonder what the mystery meant; then he would 
go into the tunnel and ask the men if there were 
no signs yet. None—always “‘none.’’ He would 
bring out a piece of rock and examine it, and say 
to himself, ‘‘It is limestone—it has crinoids and 
corals in it—the rock is right.”” Then he would 
throw it down with a sigh, and say, ‘‘But that is 
nothing; where coal is, limestone with these fossils 
in it is pretty certain to lie against its foot-casing; 
but it does not necessarily follow that where this 
peculiar rock is, coal must lie above it or beyond it; 
this sign is not sufficient.”’ 

The thought usually followed: “‘There zs one 
infallible sign—if I could only strike thai!” 

Three or four times in as many weeks he said to 
himself, ‘‘Am Ia visionary? I must be a visionary; 
everybody is in these days; everybody chases butter- 
flies; everybody seeks sudden fortune and will not 
lay one up by slow toil. This is not right, I will 
discharge the men and go at some honest work. 
There is no coal here. What a fool I have been; I 
will give it up.” 

311 


MARK TWAIN 


But he never could do it. A half-hour of pro- 
found thinking always followed; and at the end of 
it he was sure to get up and straighten himself and 
say: ‘‘There is coal there; I will not give it up; and 
coal or no coal I will drive the tunnel clear through 
the hill; I will not surrender while I am alive.” 

He never thought of asking Mr. Montague for 
more money. He said there was now but one 
chance of finding coal against nine hundred and 
ninety-nine that he would not find it, and so it 
would be wrong in him to make the request and fool- 
ish in Mr. Montague to grant it. 

He had been working three shifts of men. Finally, 
the settling of a weekly account exhausted his 
means. He could not afford to run in debt, and 
therefore he gave the men their discharge. They 
came into his cabin presently, where he sat with 
his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, 
the picture of discouragement, and their spokesman 
said: 

“Mr. Sterling, when Tim was down a week with 
his fall you kept him on half wages, and it was a 
mighty help to his family; whenever any of us was 
in trouble you’ve done what you could to help us 
out; you've acted fair and square with us every 
time, and I reckon we are men and know a man 
when we see him. We haven’t got any faith in that 
hill, but we have a respect for a man that’s got the 
pluck that you’ve showed; you’ve fought a good 
fight, with everybody agin you, and if we had grub 
to go on, I’m d—d if we wouldn’t stand by you till 
the cows come home! That is what the boys say. 

312 


THE GILDED AGE 


Now we want to put in one parting blast for luck. 
We want to work three days more; if we don’t find 
anything, we won’t bring in no bill against you. 
That is what we’ve come to say.’”’ 

Philip was touched. If he had had money enough 
to buy three days’ “‘grub’”’ he would have accepted 
the generous offer, but as it was, he could not con- 
sent to be less magnanimous than the men, and so 
he declined in a manly speech, shook hands all 
around, and resumed his solitary communings. The 
men went back to the tunnel and “‘put in a parting 
blast for luck,’’ anyhow. They did a full day’s 
work and then took their leave. They called at his 
cabin and gave him good-by, but were not able to 
tell him their day’s effort had given things a more 
promising look. 

The next day Philip sold all the tools but two or 
three sets; he also sold one of the now deserted 
cabins as old lumber, together with its domestic 
wares, and made up his mind that he would buy 
provisions with the trifle of money thus gained and 
continue his work alone. About the middle of the 
afternoon he put on his roughest clothes and went 
to the tunnel. He lit a candle and groped his way 
in. Presently he heard the sound of a pick or a 
drill, and wondered what it meant. A spark of light 
now appeared in the far end of the tunnel, and when 
he arrived there he found the man Tim at work. 
Tim said: 

“T’m to have a job in the Golden Brier mine by 
and by—in a week or ten days—and I’m going to 
work here till then. A man might as well be at 

313 


MARK TWAIN 


something, and besides I consider that I owe you 
what you paid me when I was laid up.” 

Philip said, Oh, no, he didn’t owe anything; but 
Tim persisted, and then Philip said he had a little 
provision now, and would share. So for several 
days Philip held the drill and Tim did the striking. 
At first Philip was impatient to see the result of 
every blast, and was always back and peering 
among the smoke the moment after the explosion. 
But there was never any encouraging result; and 
therefore he finally lost almost all interest, and 
hardly troubled himself to inspect results at all. He 
simply labored on, stubbornly and with little 
hope. 

Tim stayed with him till the last moment, and 
then took up his job at the Golden Brier, apparently 
as depressed by the continued barrenness of their 
mutual labors as Philip was himself. After that, 
Philip fought his battle alone, day after day, and 
slow work it was; he could scarcely see that he 
made any progress. 

Late one afternoon he finished drilling a hole 
which he had been at work at for more than two 
hours; he swabbed it out, and poured in the powder 
and inserted the fuse; then filled up the rest of the 
hole with dirt and small fragments of stone; tamped 
it down firmly, touched his candle to the fuse, and 
ran. By and by the dull report came, and he was 
about to walk back mechanically and see what was 
accomplished; but he halted; presently turned on 
his heel and thought, rather than said: 

“‘No, this is useless, this is absurd. If I found 

314 


THE GILDED AGE 


anything it would only be one of those little agera- 
vating seams of coal which doesn’t mean anything, 
and—’”’ 

By this time he was walking out of the tunnel. 
His thoughts ran on: 

“I am conquered? ...I am out of provisions, 
out of money. ... I have got to give it up.... 
All this hard work lost! But I am not conquered! 
I will go and work for money, and come back and 
have another fight with fate. Ah, me, it may be 
years, it may be years.” 

Arrived at the mouth of the tunnel, he threw his 
coat upon the ground, sat down on a stone, and his 
eye sought the westering sun and dwelt upon the 
charming landscape which stretched its woody 
ridges, wave upon wave, to the golden horizon. 

Something was taking place at his feet which did 
not attract his attention. 

His reverie continued, and its burden grew more 
and more gloomy. Presently he rose up and cast a 
look far away toward the valley, and his thoughts 
took a new direction: 

‘‘There it is! How good it looks! But down 
there is not up here. Well, I will go home and pack 
up—there is nothing else to do.”’ 

He moved off moodily toward his cabin. He had 
gone some distance before he thought of his coat; 
then he was about to turn back, but he smiled at 
the thought, and continued his journey—such a coat 
as that could be of little use in a civilized land. 
A little further on, he remembered that there were 
some papers of value in one of the pockets of the 

315 


MARK TWAIN 


relic, and then with a petulant ejaculation he turned 
back, picked up the coat and put it on. 

He made a dozen steps, and then stopped very 
suddenly. He stood still a moment, as one who is 
trying to believe something and cannot. He puta 
hand up over his shoulder and felt his back, and a 
great thrill shot through him. He grasped the skirt 
of the coat impulsively and another thrill followed. 
He snatched the coat from his back, glanced at it, 
threw it from him and flew back to the tunnel. He 
sought the spot where the coat had lain—he had 
to look close, for the light was waning—then, to 
make sure, he put his hand to the ground and a 
little stream of water swept against his fingers: 

**Thank God, I’ve struck it at last!” 

He lit a candle and ran into the tunnel; he picked 
up a piece of rubbish cast out by the last blast, 
and said: 

“This clayey stuff is what I’ve longed for—I 
know what is behind it.” 

He swung his pick with hearty good will till long 
after the darkness had gathered upon the earth, 
and when he trudged home at length he knew he 
had a coal-vein and that it was seven feet thick from 
wall to wall. 

He found a yellow envelope lying on his rickety 
table, and recognized that it was of a family sacred 
to the transmission of telegrams: 

He opened it, read it, crushed it in his hand and 
threw it down. It simply said: 

“‘Ruth is very ill,” 


CHAPTER XXXII 
RUTH’S RECOVERY. THE FUTURE OF THE END 


Alaila pomaikai kaua, ola na iwi iloko o ko kaua mau la elemakule. 
Latetkawat, 9. 


cD ALDI KBD AWO > oS) Lo eee. 
Ow 29 2 AOR9D 

T was evening when Philip took the cars at the 

Ilium station. The news of his success had 
preceded him, and while he waited for the train, he 
was the center of a group of eager questioners, who 
asked him a hundred things about the mine, and 
magnified his good fortune. There was no mistake 
this time. 

Philip, in luck, had become suddenly a person of 
consideration, whose speech was freighted with 
meaning, whose looks were all significant. The 
words of the proprietor of a rich coal-mine have a 
golden sound, and his common sayings are repeated 
as if they were solid wisdom. 

Philip wished to be alone; his good fortune at 
this moment seemed an empty mockery, one of 
those sarcasms of fate, such as that which spreads a 
dainty banquet for the man who has no appetite. 
He had longed for success principally for Ruth’s 
sake: and perhaps now, at this very moment of his 
triumph, she was dying. 

317 


MARK TWAIN 


‘‘Shust what I said, Mister Sderling,’”’ the land- 
lord of the Ilium hotel kept repeating. ‘‘I dold 
Jake Schmidt he find him dere shust so sure as 
noting.” 

“You ought to have taken a share, Mr. Dae 
heimer,’’ said Philip. 

‘““Yaas, I know.- But d’old woman, she say, 
“You sticks to your pisiness.’ So I sticks to ’em. 
Und I makes noting. Dat Mister Prierly, he don’t 
never come back here no more, ain’t it?’ 

“Why ?” 

“Vell, dere is so many peers, und so many oder 
dhrinks, I got ’em all set down, ven he coomes 
back.”’ 

It was a long night for Philip, and a restless one. 
At any other time the swing of the cars would have 
lulled him to sleep, and the rattle and clank of 
wheels and rails, the roar of the whirling iron, would 
have only been cheerful reminders of swift and safe 
travel. Now they were voices of warning and | 
taunting; and instead of going rapidly the train 
seemed to crawl at a snail’s pace. And it not only 
crawled, but it frequently stopped; and when it 
stopped it stood dead still, and there was an omi- 
nous silence. Was anything the matter, he wondered. 
Only a station, probably. . Perhaps, he thought, a 
telegraphic station. And then he listened eagerly. 
Would the conductor open the door and ask for 
Philip Sterling, and hand him a fatal despatch? 

How long they seemed to wait. And then slowly 
beginning to move, they were off again, shaking, 
pounding, screaming through the night. He drew 

318 


THE GILDED AGE 


his curtain from time to time and looked out. There 
was the lurid sky-line of the wooded range along the 
base of which they were crawling. There was the 
Susquehanna, gleaming in the moonlight. There 
was a stretch of level valley with silent farmhouses, 
the occupants all at rest, without trouble, without 
anxiety. There was a church, a graveyard, a mill, 
a village; and now, without pause or fear, the train 
had mounted a trestle-work high in air and was 
creeping along the top of it, while a swift torrent 
foamed a hundred feet below. 

What would the morning bring? Even while he 
was flying to her, her gentle spirit might have gone 
on another flight, whither he could not follow her. 
He was full of foreboding. He fell at length into 
a restless doze. There was a noise in his ears as of 
a rushing torrent when a stream is swollen by a 
freshet in the spring. It was like the breaking up of 
life; he was struggling in the consciousness of coming 
death; when Ruth stood by his side, clothed in 
white, with a face like that of an angel, radiant, 
smiling, pointing to the sky, and saying, ‘‘Come.” 
He awoke with a cry—the train was roaring through 
a bridge, and it shot out into daylight. 

When morning came the train was industriously 
toiling along through the flat lands of Lancaster, 
with its broad farms of corn and wheat, its mean 
houses of stone, its vast barns and granaries, built 
as if for storing the riches of Heliogabalus. Then 
came the smiling fields of Chester, with their English 
green, and soon the county of Philadelphia itself, 
and the increasing signs of the approach to a great 

319 


MARK TWAIN 


city. Long trains of coal-cars, laden and unladen, 
stood upon sidings; the tracks of other roads were 
crossed; the smoke of other locomotives was seen 
on parallel lines; factories multiplied; streets ap- 
peared; the noise of a busy city began to fill the 
air; and with a slower and slower clank on the con- 
necting rails and interlacing switches the train 
rolled into the station and stood still. 

It was a hot August morning. The broad streets 
glowed in the sun, and the white-shuttered houses 
stared at the hot thoroughfares like closed bakers’ 
ovens set along the highway. Philip was oppressed 
with the heavy air; the sweltering city lay as ina 
swoon. ‘Taking a street-car, he rode away to the 
northern part of the city, the newer portion, formerly 
the district of Spring Garden, for in this the Boltons 
now lived, in a small brick house, befitting their 
altered fortunes. 

He could scarcely restrain his impatience when he 
came in sight of the house. The window-shutters 
were not “‘bowed’’; thank God for that. Ruth 
was still living, then. He ran up the steps and 
rang. Mrs. Bolton met him at the door. 

““Thee is very welcome, Philip.”’ 

“And Ruth?” 

“She is very ill, but quieter than she has been, 
and the fever is a little abating. The most danger- 
ous time will be when the fever leaves her. The 
doctor fears she will not have strength enough to 
rally from it. Yes, thee can see her.’ 

Mrs. Bolton led the way to the little chamber 
where Ruth lay. ‘‘Oh,’”’ said her mother, ‘‘if she 

320 


THE GILDED AGE 


were only in her cool and spacious room in our old 
home. She says that seems like heaven.” 

Mr. Bolton sat by Ruth’s bedside, and he rose 
and silently pressed Philip’s hand. The room had 
but one window; that was wide open to admit the 
air, but the air that came in was hot and lifeless. 
Upon the table stood a vase of flowers. Ruth’s 
eyes were closed; her cheeks were flushed with 
fever, and she moved her head restlessly as if in 
pain. 

“Ruth,” said her mother, bending over her, 
“Philip is here.” 

Ruth’s eyes unclosed, there was a gleam of recog- 
nition in them, there was an attempt at a smile 
upon her face, and she tried to raise her thin hand, 
as Philip touched her forehead with his lips; and 
he heard her murmur: 

*“Dear Phil.’’ 

There was nothing to be done but to watch and 
wait for the cruel fever to burn itself out. Dr. 
Longstreet told Philip that the fever had undoubt- 
edly been contracted in the hospital, but it was 
not malignant, and would be little dangerous if 
Ruth were not so worn down with work, or if she 
had a less delicate constitution. 

“It is only her indomitable will that has kept her 
up for weeks. And if that should leave her now, 
there will be no hope. You can do more for her 
now, sir, than I can.” 

‘‘How?”’ asked Philip eagerly. 

‘Your presence, more than anything else, will 
inspire her with the desire to live.” 

321 


MARK TWAIN 


When the fever turned Ruth was in a very criti- 
cal condition. For two days her life was like the 
fluttering of a lighted candle in the wind. Philip 
was constantly by her side, and she seemed to be 
conscious of his presence, and to cling to him, as 
one borne away by a swift stream clings to a 
stretched-out hand from the shore. If he was ab- 
sent a moment her restless eyes sought something 
they were disappointed not to find. | 

Philip so yearned to bring her back to life, he 
willed it so strongly and passionately, that his will 
appeared to affect hers and she seemed slowly to 
draw life from his. 

After two days of this struggle with the grasping 
enemy, it was evident to Dr. Longstreet that Ruth’s 
will was beginning to issue its orders to her body 
with some force, and that strength was slowly 
coming back. In another day there was a decided 
improvement. As Philip sat holding her weak hand 
and watching the least sign of resolution in her 
face, Ruth was able to whisper: 

“‘I so want to live, for you, Phil!’’ 

“You will, darling, you must,” said Philip, in a 
tone of faith and courage that carried a thrill of de- 
termination—of command—along all her nerves. 

Slowly Philip drew her back to life. Slowly she 
came back, as one willing but well-nigh helpless. 
It was new for Ruth to feel this dependence on 
another’s nature, to consciously draw strength of 
will from the will of another. It was a new but a 
dear joy, to be lifted up and carried back into the 
happy world, which was now all aglow with the light 

322 


THE GILDED AGE 


of love; to be lifted and carried by the one she loved 
more than her own life. 

‘Sweetheart,’ she said to Philip, ‘‘I would not 
have cared to come back but for thy love.” 

*“Not for thy profession ?”’ 

“Oh, thee may be glad enough of that some day, 
when thy coal-bed is dug out and thee and father 
are in the air again.” 

When Ruth was able to ride she was taken into 
the country, for the pure air was necessary to her 
speedy recovery. The family went withher. Philip 
could not be spared from her side, and Mr. Bolton 
had gone up to Ilium to look into that wonderful 
coal-mine and to make arrangements for developing 
it, and bringing its wealth to market. Philip had 
insisted on reconveying the Ilium property to Mr. 
Bolton, retaining only the share originally contem- 
plated for himself, and Mr. Bolton, therefore, once 
more found himself engaged in business and a per- 
son of some consequence in Third Street. The mine 
turned out even better than was at first hoped, and 
would, if judiciously managed, be a fortune to them 
all. This also seemed to be the opinion of Mr. 
Bigler, who heard of it as soon as anybody, and, 
with the impudence of his class, called upon Mr. 
Bolton for a little aid in a patent car-wheel he had 
bought an interest in. That rascal, Small, he said, 
had swindled him out of all he had. 

Mr. Bolton told him he was very sorry, and 
recommended him to sue Small. 

Mr. Small also came with a similar story about 
Mr. Bigler; and Mr. Bolton had the grace to give 

323 


MARK TWAIN 


him like advice. And he added, ‘‘If you and Bigler 
will procure the indictment of each other, you may 
have the satisfaction of putting each other in the 
penitentiary for the forgery of my acceptances.”’ 

Bigler and Small did not quarrel, however. They 
both attacked Mr. Bolton behind his back as a 
swindler, and circulated the story that he had made 
a fortune by failing. 

In the pure air of the highlands, amid the golden 
glories of ripening September, Ruth rapidly came 
back to health. How beautiful the world is to an 
invalid, whose senses are all clarified, who has been 
so near the world of spirits that she is sensitive to 
the finest influences, and whose frame responds with 
a thrill to the subtlest ministrations of soothing 
nature. Mere life is a luxury, and the color of the 
grass, of the flowers, of the sky, the wind in the 
trees, the outlines of the horizon, the forms of 
clouds, all give a pleasure as exquisite as the sweet- 
est music to the ear famishing for it. The world 
was all new and fresh to Ruth, as if it had just 
been created for her, and love filled it, till her heart 
was overflowing with happiness. 

It was golden September also at Fallkill. And 
Alice sat by the open window in her room at home, 
looking out upon the meadows where the laborers 
were cutting the second crop of clover. The fra- 
grance of it floated to her nostrils. Perhaps she 
did not mind it. She was thinking. She had just 
been writing to Ruth, and on the table before her 
was a yellow piece of paper with a faded four-leaved 
clover pinned on it—only a memory now. In her 

324 


THE GILDED AGE 


letter to Ruth she had poured out her heartiest 
blessings upon them both, with her dear love for- 
ever and forever. 

‘“Thank God,” she said, ‘‘they will never know.” 

They never would know. And the world never 
knows how many women there are like Alice, whose 
sweet but lonely lives of self-sacrifice, gentle, faith- 
ful, loving souls, bless it continually. 

‘She is a dear girl,” said Philip, when Ruth 
showed him the letter. 

‘Yes, Phil, and we can spare a great deal of love 
for her, our own lives are so full.” 


WYN AIT NAM SO 


APPENDIX 


Nothing gives such weight and 
dignity to a book as an Appendix. 
Herodotus. 


APPENDIX 


Perhaps some apology to the reader is necessary 
in view of our failure to find Laura’s father. We 
supposed, from the ease with which lost persons are 
found in novels, that it would not be difficult. But 
it was; indeed, it was impossible; and therefore the 
portions of the narrative containing the record of 
the search have been stricken out. Not because 
they were not interesting—for they were; but inas- 
much as the man was not found, after all, it did not 
seem wise to harass and excite the reader to no 
purpose. Tue AUTHORS. 


_ «. 
Pes ‘A tea 


TRANSLATIONS 


OF 
CHAPTER-HEAD MOTTOES 


BY 
J. HAMMOND ,TRUMBULL, LL.D., L.H.D. 


'CHAPTER II, page 9. 

Sioux (Dakota) translation of the Pilgrim’s Progress. By- 
Ends names his distinguished friends, in the City of Fair- 
Speech: 

—“My Lord Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my Lord 
Fair-speech, from whose ancestors the town first took its 
name; also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr. Facing-both-ways, Mr. 
Anything,” etc. 

Semi-Saxon: 

“The richest women all—that were in the land, 
And the higher men’s daughters— 
There was many a rich garment—on the fair folk, 
There was mickle envy—from [all parts of the country], 
For each weened to be—better than others.” 


Cuapter III, page 31. | 
Danish proverb: One hair of a maiden’s head pulls 
stronger than ten yoke of oxen. 


CHAPTER IV, page 38. 
Quiché (Guatemalan), from a native drama, published by 


Brasseur de Bourbourg: 
“I have snared and caught him, I have taken and bound 


him, with my brilliant snares, with my white noose, with 
my bracelets of chiseled gold, with my rings, and with my 
enchantments.” 

Old French proverb: Every one has the palms of his hands 
turned toward himself. 


33t 


MARK TWAIN 


CHAPTER V, page 47. 
Tamul: ‘ Books.” 
Chippeway: ‘My books are many and they are all good.” 
‘Although his books are good, he does not much look into 
them.” 


Cuapter VI, page 54. 

Assyrian (from Smith’s Assurbanipal): ‘‘Ni-ni-id [dag]- 
ga ra a-ha-mis,” ‘‘We will (help) each other.” 

[Note. The fourth group varies in different copies of the 
cuneiform record. Mr. Smith puts dag, marking it as a 
variant, and translates by “help.’’ Others may prefer to 
read gul, “‘to cheat.” As philological criticism would have 
been out of place in The Gilded Age, and as the passage 
is a familiar one, it seemed best to omst the questionable 
group—leaving it to the reader to fill the blank as in his 
better judgment he might determine.] 

Italian, from the Jerusalem Delivered, c. iv., st. 78: 

*fAll arts the enchantress practised to beguile 

Some new admirer in her well-spread snare; 
Nor used with all, nor always, the same wile, 
But shaped to every taste her grace and air.” 


CuapTer VIII, page 7o. 

Provencal: Dear friend, return, for pity’s sake, to me, at 
once. 

Basque (Souletin dialect); from a popular song, published 
by Vallaberry: “You gave me your word—not once only, 
twice—that you would be mine. I am the same as in other 
times; I have not changed, for I took it to my heart, and 
I loved you.”—Chants populaires du pays Basque, pp. 6, 7. 


Cuapter X, page 85. 
Arabic: 
‘And her denying increased his devotion in love: 
For lovely, as a thing, to man, is that which is denied 
him.” 
From an Arabic poet quoted in the Ta el-’Aroos (of the 
Seyyid Murtada), which, as everybody knows, is a commen- 
tary on the Kémoos—the Arabic ‘“‘Webster’s Unabridged.” 


332 


THE GILDED AGE 


Basque. From the Poésies Basques of Bernard d’Eche- 
parre (Bordeaux, 1545), edited by G. Brunet, 1847: 
“Was there ever any one so unfortunate as I am? 
She whom I adore does not love me at all, and yet I can- 
not renounce her.” 


CHAPTER XI, page 06. 

Eftk (or Old Calabar) proverb: ‘The rat enters the trap, 
the trap catches him; if he did not go into the trap, the 
trap would not doso.” From R. F. Burton’s Wit and Wis- 
dom of West Africa, p. 367. 


CHAPTER XII, page 117. 
Arrawak version of Acts xix. 23: ‘And the same time 
there arose no small stir (Gr. rdpayos ovx oAtyos) about that 
way.” 


CHAPTER XIII, page 124. 

Latin (Seneca): “In an evil career a reckless downward 
course is inevitably taken.” 

Latin (Cicero): “For men are subject to their own im- 
pulses as soon as they have once parted company with rea- 
son; and their very weakness gives way to itself, incau- 
tiously sails into deep water and finds no place of anchorage.” 


CHAPTER XIV, page 133. 
Quiché (Guatemalan), from the Popol Vuh, or Sacred Book, 
edited by Brasseur de Bourbourg, p. 222: 
—“*What will you give us, then, if we will take pity on 
you?’ they said. ‘Ah, well we will give you silver,’ re- 
sponded the associate [petitioners].” 


CHapter XV, page 147. 

Italian proverb: ‘Strong is the vinegar of sweet wine.” 
Anglo-Saxon: “Such is no feminine usage 

for a woman to practise, 

although she be beautiful,— 

that a peace-weaver 

machinate to deprive of life, 

after burning anger, 

- a man beloved.” 
—Thorpe’s Translation, 3885-91. 


333 


MARK TWAIN 


CHAPTER XVI, page 158. 

Quiché (from a native drama): ““My bravery and my 
power have availed me nothing! Alas, let heaven and earth 
hear me! Is it true that I must die, that I must die here, 
between earth and sky?” 


CHAPTER XVII, page 167. 
‘A poison-toothed serpent (moonthoawa) is debt.” 


CaHarrer XVIII, page 177. 
Russian: ‘‘The sun began to shine, but not for a long 
time; it shone for a moment and disappeared.” 
Yoruba proverb: “I almost killed the bird.” ‘‘ Nobody can 
make a stew of almost” (or “Almost never made a stew”’).— 
Crowther’s Yoruba Proverbs, in Grammar, p. 229. 


CHAPTER XIX, page 188. 
Icelandic, from a modern poem: 

‘“‘When anguish wars in thy heavy breast, 
and adverse scourges lash thy cheeks, 
and the world turns her back on thee, 
and pleasure mocketh at thy pain: 
Think all is round and easily turns; 
he weeps to-morrow who laughs to-day; 

Time makes all good.” 


CHAPTER XX, page 200. 
Wolof (Senegambtan) proverb: “If you go to the sparrows’ 
ball, take with you some ears of corn for them.” R. F. 
Burton, from Dard’s Grammaire Wolofe. 
Hungarian, from 2 Kings, viii. 13: 
—‘Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great 
thing?” 
CHAPTER XXI, page 210. 
French of Moliére: 
‘Nothing in the world is more noble and more beautiful 
Than the holy fervor of true zeal.”—Molzére. 
French: [The Fox] ‘‘assumed a benign and tender ex- 
pression, 
He bade them good day with a Laudate Deum, 
And invited the whole world to share his brotherly love.” 


334 


THE GILDED AGE 


CHAPTER XXII, page 213. 


French of Moliére: Tartufe, the hypocrite, is speaking: 
*“‘According to differing emergencies, there is a science 
Of stretching the limitations of our conscience, 
And of compensating the evil of our acts 
By the purity of our motives.” 


CHAPTER XXIII, page 222. 


Sanskrit: ‘The distinctions of obscurity are eightfold, as 
are also those of illusion; extreme illusion is tenfold; gloom 
is eighteenfold, and so is utter darkness.”’ 

[This description of a New York jury is from Memorial 
Verses on the Sankya philosophy, translated by Cole- 
brooke.] 

Old Welsh: ‘‘Nobody is a judge through learning; al- 
though a person may always learn he will not be a judge 
unless there be wisdom in his heart; however wise a person 
may be, he will not be a judge unless there be learning with 
the wisdom.” —A ncient Laws of Wales, ii. 207. 


CHAPIER XXIV, page 233. 
Danish proverb: ‘Virtue in the middle,” said the Devil, 
when he sat down between two lawyers. 
Breton: ‘‘This is a great pleader! Have you heard him 
plead?”’—Legonidec’s Descrip. de Braham. 


CHAPTER XXV, page 244. 

Old French: ‘“‘‘Yea, but,’ asked Trinquamelle, ‘how do 
you proceed, my friend, in criminal causes, the culpable and 
guilty party being taken and seized upon flagrante crimine?’ 
‘Even as your other worships use to do,’ answered (Judge) 
Bridlegoose.’’—-Rabelais, Pantagruel, b. it., ch. 137. 

Breton: “Have you anything to say for her justifica- 
tion?’’—Legonidec. 


CHAPTER XXVI, page 256. 
Chippeway: “I don’t know what may have happened; 
perhaps we shall hear bad news!’’—Baraga. 


335 


MARK TWAIN 


CHAPTER XXVII, page 265. 

Chinese (Canton dialect, Tsow pak pat fun): “Black and 
white not distinguished,” i.e., Right and wrong not per- 
ceived. 

Spanish proverb (of a court of law): Paper and ink and 
little justice. 


CHAPTER XXVIII, page 276. 


Efik (Old Calabar) proverb: ‘‘One monkey does not like 
to see another get his belly full.”’—Burton’s W. African 
Proverbs. 

Grecian. From the Greek Anthology: ‘When the Crab 
caught with his claw the Snake, he reproved him for his 
indirect course.”? [An old version of what the Pot said to 
the Kettle.] 

Massachusetts Indian, from Eliot’s translation of Psalm 
xxxv. 21: ‘‘Yea, they opened their mouth wide against 
me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath seen it!” 

CHAPTER XXIX, page 291. 
Javanese: “Alas!” 
Cornish: “My heart yet is proud 
Though I am nearly dead.”—The Creation. 


CHAPTER XXX, page 301. 
Danish proverb: ‘‘He is a good driver who knows how to 
turn.” 
Sioux (Dakota): “Let us go now. Will you go?” [The 
Iapi Oaye is a Dakota pomp ere published monthly in the 
Dakota language.] 


CHAPTER XXXI, page 310. 
Kanuri (Borneo): ‘‘At the bottom of patience there is 
heaven.”—R. F. Burton’s West African Proverbs. 
Quiché: “Is it in vain, is it without profit, that Iam come 
here to lose so many days, so many nights?” 


CHAPTER XXXII, page 317. 
Hawaiian: ‘Then we two shall be happy, our offspring 
shall live in the days of our old age.” 
Syriac (from the Old Testament; the blessing on Naomi 


336 


THE GILDED AGE 


transferred to Ruth): ‘‘And he shall be unto thee a restorer 
of thy life [consolator anime, as Walton translates from the 
Syriac version,] and a nourisher of thine old age.” Ruth 
WW. 15. 


TAIL-PIECE, page 352. 


Hebrew: “The end of a thing is better than the beginning.” 
Eccles. vii. 8. 


THE END 


