Lemak’s Park Church Lecture Now Available

 by 
Center For Mark Twain Studies
 | 
Jul 16, 2026
 | 
Trouble Begins Lectures
 | 
0 comments

The Center for Mark Twain Studies (CMTS) at Elmira College continued the 
2026 Park Church Summer Lecture Series
 last night.  The lectures take place on Wednesdays throughout July at the historic Park Church. Located at 208 West Grey Street (Elmira), the lectures are free and open to the public. The last lecture in the 2026 series will take place on Wendesday, July 22.

Mary Lemak continued the  lecture series with a talk entitled “’Brockway’s Paddle: Institutional Violence and Press Protection at the Elmira Reformatory.” Lemak is
 a Juris Doctor Candidate entering her final year at the University at Buffalo School of Law.

The late-nineteenth saw expansion in both reform movements and public institutions in the United States. States around the country were giving women the right to vote, passing early labor laws to protect women and children, and dealing with an ever-changing and growing immigrant population. During this time, some progressives were also concerned with an oft overlooked population: incarcerated people. As a trial run of “the new penology,” progressives in the American Penology Association pushed for a brand-new facility in which they would focus on rehabilitation and reintegration instead of retributive punishment. Because of its rural locale but relative proximity to major cities, the New York legislature decided to build this facility in Elmira, New York. The Elmira Reformatory, as it was originally called, was founded with the intent to rehabilitate vulnerable youth and give them access to the skills and resources necessary to deter future crime. Instead of following its mission plan, the Reformatory quickly became a hotbed of poor conditions and gruesome violence. Its superintendent, Zebulon Brockway, originated the plan for the Reformatory. He became a highly controversial figure, bolstered by the 
New York Times 
and disparaged by the 
New York World.
 However, his support in the press allowed him to escape any consequences for the abuse he was almost single-handedly responsible for.

This talk contains two major arguments: first that Brockway was able to get away with abusing the residents of the Reformatory for so long because there was no oversight; and second that Brockway escaped punishment because of his support from the 
New York Times
 and its connections to the political elite. This talk first discusses Zebulon Brockway’s early life and career in the criminal justice system. It then outlines Brockway’s initial plan for the Reformatory. It then shifts and discusses press politics and the dynamic between the 
New York Times 
and 
New York World
 in the Gilded Age. This talk then provides a thorough analysis of the New York State Board of Charities’ investigation into the conditions and management at the Reformatory. It discusses the press’s reaction to the Board of Charities Investigation and details the subsequent Legislative investigation into the Reformatory’s Board of Managers. Finally, it discusses the lackluster aftermath of the investigations and discusses the modern reputations of Brockway and the Reformatory.

Mary Lemak
 is a Juris Doctor Candidate entering her final year at the University at Buffalo School of Law. She has a Bachelor’s of Arts in History from the University at Albany; she focused her senior honors thesis on the Park Church’s Reverend Annis Ford Eastman and Elmira’s Gilded Age politics. She currently works with incarcerated people on their post-conviction proceedings. Some of her clients are incarcerated in Elmira. Upon graduation, she hopes to continue her work in criminal defense in the Southern Tier.

Additional
 
2026 Park Church Summer Lectures
:

7:00 p.m., Wed., July 22: “Mark Twain’s History of the Novel” Emily Gowen, University of Notre Dame

About The Park Church

Founded in 1846 by a group of abolitionists, including Jervis Langdon, Mark Twain’s father-in-law, The Park Church has been a strong presence in Elmira’s history. Some of its congregation were close friends and family members to Mark Twain, including Susan Crane, who donated flowers from Quarry Farm every Sunday. Known for its striking architectural features, The Park Church contained Elmira’s first public library and has a long history of charitable service to the Elmira community. Thomas K. Beecher, brother to Harriet Beecher Stowe and friend of Mark Twain, was the first minister at the Park Church and presided over its construction. Before its demolition in 1939, the Langdon Mansion was located directly across from the Park Church.

About The Trouble Begins Lecture Series

In 1984, the Elmira College Center for Mark Twain Studies initiated a lecture series, The Trouble Begins at Eight. The title came from the handbill advertising Mark Twain’s October 2, 1866 lecture presented at Maguire’s Academy of Music in San Francisco. The first lectures were presented in 1985. By invitation, Mark Twain scholars present lectures in the fall and spring of each year, in the Barn at Quarry Farm or at Peterson Chapel in Cowles Hall on Elmira College’s campus. All lectures are free and open to the public.

Submit a Comment
 
Cancel reply
