Morris Davis’s Trouble Begins Lecture Now Available

 by 
Center For Mark Twain Studies
 | 
May 28, 2026
 | 
Trouble Begins Lectures
 | 
0 comments

The Center for Mark Twain Studies (CMTS) at Elmira College held its final lecture in the 
2026 Spring Trouble Begins Lecture Series, 
on May 27 at the historic Barn at Quarry Farm.

The final lecture featured Maggie E. Morris Davis, author of 
Reading the Classed Child: The Language of Depression-Era Children in Poverty. 
She is an assistant professor in the Department of English at Illinois State University. Her work has most recently been published in 
American Quarterly, Children’s Literature, 
and 
Resources for American Literary Study, 
as well as several edited collections
.

Morris Davis discusses how illustrations of Twain’s young characters, including the 1885 illustrations of 
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
, a used 1960s mass-produced coloring book, and Philip Stead and Erin Stead’s 
The Purloining of Prince Oleomargarine
 (a children’s book adaptation of archival notes of a bedtime story that Mark Twain told his daughters), show a hierarchy of class and race. Morris Davis offers close readings of the illustrations within 
The Purloining of Prince Oleomargarine
, to illuminate intersectional differences that might otherwise go unnoticed and challenge the claims of the authors and illustrators that their work is politically neutral.

Along with all previous Trouble Begins lectures, this lecture will be recorded and posted to the
 
CMTS website
.   

About The Trouble Begins Lecture Series

In 1984, the Elmira College Center for Mark Twain Studies initiated a lecture series, The Trouble Begins at Eight. The title came from the handbill advertising Mark Twain’s October 2, 1866 lecture presented at Maguire’s Academy of Music in San Francisco. The first lectures were presented in 1985. By invitation, Mark Twain scholars present lectures in the fall and spring of each year, in the Barn at Quarry Farm or at Peterson Chapel in Cowles Hall on Elmira College’s campus. All lectures are free and open to the public.

Share this:

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)

Bluesky

Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window)

Mastodon

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

LinkedIn

Share on Threads (Opens in new window)

Threads

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like this:
Like
 
Loading…

Submit a Comment
 
Cancel reply
