The First Trouble Begins Poetry Reading Now Available

 by 
Center For Mark Twain Studies
 | 
May 23, 2026
 | 
Trouble Begins Lectures
 | 
0 comments

The Center for Mark Twain Studies (CMTS) at Elmira College held its third event in the 
2026 Spring Trouble Begins Lecture Series, 
which takes place on Wednesdays throughout May at the historic Barn at Quarry Farm. Located at 131 Crane Road, the lectures are free and open to the public. They begin at 7:00 p.m., and the remaining lecture will be held on  May 27.

The third lecture was a poetry reading by Michael Czarnecki, a local poet, and James Plath, Colwell Professor of English at Illinois Wesleyan University.  The was the first poetry reading in the Trouble Begins Lecture Series 40-year history.

Czarnecki began writing poetry as a junior in high school and, since then, has lived solely through the creative word, publishing 18 books and giving hundreds of readings throughout the country. 

Plath is a recognized Hemingway and Updike scholar who taught Twain as a Fulbright Scholar in Barbados. He is the author-editor of 11 books, including The 100 Greatest Literary Characters and three books of poetry:  
Courbet, on the Rocks
; 
Everything Shapes Itself to the Sea
; and 
At Quarry Farm
.

Czarnecki and Plath stayed at Quarry Farm and wrote poetry inspired by the peacefulness and beauty of the historic property. Each will read some of their poetry, share insights, and talk about what it was like to live and write where Twain composed many of his best-loved works.  

Additional 
2026 Spring Trouble Begins Lectures
:

7:00 p.m., Wed., May 27: “The Politics of Illustrating Children in Twain’s Adaptation Network” Maggie Morris Davis, Illinois State University

About The Trouble Begins Lecture Series

In 1984, the Elmira College Center for Mark Twain Studies initiated a lecture series, The Trouble Begins at Eight. The title came from the handbill advertising Mark Twain’s October 2, 1866 lecture presented at Maguire’s Academy of Music in San Francisco. The first lectures were presented in 1985. By invitation, Mark Twain scholars present lectures in the fall and spring of each year, in the Barn at Quarry Farm or at Peterson Chapel in Cowles Hall on Elmira College’s campus. All lectures are free and open to the public.

Share this:

Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)

Email

Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)

Bluesky

Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window)

Mastodon

Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

LinkedIn

Share on Threads (Opens in new window)

Threads

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like this:
Like
 
Loading…

Submit a Comment
 
Cancel reply
